The Project Gutenberg eBook of The story of the Iliad
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The story of the Iliad

Author: Alfred John Church
        Homer


        
Release date: August 12, 2024 [eBook #74231]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The Macmillan Company, 1920

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/74231

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE ILIAD ***







  THE

  STORY OF THE ILIAD


  BY THE

  REV. ALFRED J. CHURCH, M.A.

  LATELY PROFESSOR OF LATIN IN UNIVERSITY COLLEGE
  LONDON


  EDITED FOR SCHOOL USE



  New York
  THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., LTD.
  1920

  _All rights reserved_




  COPYRIGHT, 1905,
  BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.


  Set up and electrotyped.  Published March, 1905.




CONTENTS



INTRODUCTION

THE ILIAD:

  I. THE QUARREL
  II. THE ASSEMBLY
  III. THE DUEL OF PARIS AND MENELAUS
  IV. THE BROKEN OATH
  V. THE VALIANT DEEDS OF DIOMED
  VI. GLAUCUS AND DIOMED
  VII. HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE
  VIII. THE DUEL OF HECTOR AND AJAX
  IX. THE BATTLE ON THE PLAIN
  X. THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES
  XI. THE ADVENTURE OF ULYSSES AND DIOMED
  XII. THE WOUNDING OF THE CHIEFS
  XIII. THE BATTLE AT THE WALL
  XIV. THE BATTLE AT THE SHIPS
  XV. THE DEEDS AND DEATH OF PATROCLUS
  XVI. THE ROUSING OF ACHILLES
  XVII. THE MAKING OF THE ARMS
  XVIII. THE ENDING OF THE STRIFE
  XIX. THE BATTLE AT THE RIVER
  XX. THE BATTLE OF THE GODS
  XXI. THE SLAYING OF HECTOR
  XXII. THE BURNING OF PATROCLUS
  XXIII. THE RANSOMING OF HECTOR

PRONUNCIATION OF PROPER NAMES




INTRODUCTION

Three thousand years ago the world was still young.  The western
continent was a huge wilderness, and the greater part of Europe was
inhabited by savage and wandering tribes.  Only a few nations at the
eastern end of the Mediterranean and in the neighbouring parts of
Asia had learned to dwell in cities, to use a written language, to
make laws for themselves, and to live in a more orderly fashion.  Of
these nations the most brilliant was that of the Greeks, who were
destined in war, in learning, in government, and in the arts, to play
a great part in the world, and to be the real founders of our modern
civilization.  While they were still a rude people, they had noble
ideals of beauty and bravery, of duty and justice.  Even before they
had a written language, their singers had made songs about their
heroes and their great deeds; and later these songs, which fathers
had taught to children, and these children to their children, were
brought together into two long and wonderful poems, which have ever
since been the delight of the world, the _Iliad_ and the _Odyssey_.

The _Iliad_ is the story of the siege of Ilium, or Troy, on the
western coast of Asia Minor.  Paris, son of the king of Troy, had
enticed Helen, the most beautiful of Grecian women, and the wife of a
Grecian king, to leave her husband's home with him; and the kings and
princes of the Greeks had gathered an army and a fleet and sailed
across the Ægean Sea to rescue her.  For ten years they strove to
capture the city.  According to the fine old legends, the gods
themselves took a part in the war, some siding with the Greeks, and
some with the Trojans.  It was finally through Ulysses, a famous
Greek warrior, brave and fierce as well as wise and crafty, that the
Greeks captured the city.

The second poem, the _Odyssey_, tells what befell Ulysses, or
Odysseus, as the Greeks called him, on his homeward way.  Sailing
from Troy with his little fleet of ships, which were so small that
they used oars as well as sails, he was destined to wander for ten
years longer before he could return to his rocky island of Ithaca, on
the west shore of Greece, and to his faithful wife, Penelope.

He had marvellous adventures, for the gods who had opposed the Greeks
at Troy had plotted to bring him ill-fortune.  Just as his ships were
safely rounding the southern cape of Greece, a fierce storm took them
out of their course and bore them to many strange lands--lands of
giants, man-eating monsters, and wondrous enchantments of which you
will delight to read.  Through countless perils the resolute wanderer
forced his way, losing ship after ship from his little fleet, and
companion after companion from his own band, until he reached home
friendless and alone, and found his palace, his property, and his
family all in the power of a band of greedy princes.  These he
overcame by his cunning and his strength, and his long trials were
ended.

As you read these ancient tales, you must forget what knowledge you
have of the world, and think of it as the Greeks did. It was only a
little part of the world that they knew at all,--the eastern end of
the Mediterranean,--but even that seemed to them a great and
marvellous region.  Beyond its borders were strange and mysterious
lands, in which wonders of all kinds were found, and round all ran
the great world-river, the encircling stream of Ocean.

In the mountains of Olympus, to the northward, lived the gods.  There
was Zeus, greatest of all, the god of thunder and the wide heavens;
Hera, his wife; Apollo, the archer god; Athene, the wise and clever
goddess; Poseidon, who ruled the sea; Aphrodite, the goddess of love;
Hephæstus, the cunning workman; Ares, the god of war; Hermes, the
swift messenger; and others still, whom you will learn to know as you
read.  All these were worshipped by men with prayer and sacrifice;
and, as in the early legends of many races, the gods often took the
shape of men and women; they had their favourites and those whom they
hated; and they ruled the fate of mortals as they chose.

If you let yourselves be beguiled into this old, simple way of
regarding earth and heaven, you will not only love these ancient
tales yourself, but you will see why, for century after century, they
have been the longest loved and the best loved of all tales--beloved
by old and young, by men and women and children.  For they are
hero-tales,--tales of war and adventure, tales of bravery and
nobility, tales of the heroes that mankind, almost since the
beginning of time, have looked to as ideals of wisdom and strength
and beauty.




THE ILIAD



CHAPTER I

THE QUARREL

Leda, Queen of Sparta, bare a daughter, Helen by name, that grew to
be the fairest of all women upon earth.  She married Menelaus, son of
Atreus, and for a while dwelt in peace with her husband, bearing him
a daughter, Hermione by name.  But there came to the court of
Menelaus, who was by this time King of Sparta, a certain Paris,
second in birth among the sons of Priam, King of Troy.  Menelaus
entertained him hospitably, but Paris repaid his kindness with evil,
for he carried off his wife, the fair Helen, and took with her many
of the King's possessions.


Le'-da.  Men-e-la'-us.  Ag-a-mem'-non.  Her-mi'-o-ne.  A'-treus.


Then Menelaus, with his elder brother Agamemnon, who was lord of all
the Greeks, went to all the chiefs, and prayed that they would help
them to avenge this wrong.  Thus was a great host gathered together,
even a hundred thousand men, and eleven hundred fourscore and six
ships.

For nine years did the Greeks besiege the city of Troy.  They won,
indeed, in the field, but could not break through the walls.

Now because they had been away from their homes for many years, they
were in want of things needful.  Therefore it was their custom to
leave part of the army to watch the city, and with part to spoil the
cities in the country round about.  And in this way the great quarrel
that caused such trouble to the host came about.

The Greeks sacked the city of Chryse, where was a temple of Apollo,
and a priest that served the temple.  And when they divided the
spoil, they gave to King Agamemnon, with other gifts, the priest's
daughter Chryseis.  Thereupon Chryses, the priest, came to the camp,
wishing to ransom his daughter.  Much gold he brought with him, and
on his staff of gold he carried the holy garland, that men might
reverence him the more.  He went to all the chiefs, and to the sons
of Atreus first of all, saying:--


Chry'-se.  A-pol'-lo.  Chry-se'-is.  Chry'-ses.


"Loose, I pray you, my dear daughter, and take the ransom for her; so
may the gods that dwell in Olympus grant you to take the city of
Troy, and to have safe return to your homes."

Then all the others spake him fair, and would have done what he
wished.  Only Agamemnon would not have it so.

"Get thee out, graybeard!" he cried in great wrath.  "Let me not find
thee lingering now by the ships, neither coming hither again, or it
shall be the worse for thee, for all thy priesthood.  And as for thy
daughter, I shall carry her away to Argos, when I shall have taken
this city of Troy."

Then the old man went out hastily in great fear and trouble.  And he
walked in his sorrow by the shore of the sounding sea, and prayed to
his god Apollo.

"Hear me, God of the silver bow!  If I have built thee a temple, and
offered thee the fat of many bullocks and rams, hear me, and avenge
my tears on these Greeks with thine arrows!"

And Apollo heard him.  Wroth was he that men had so dishonoured his
priest, and he came down from the top of Olympus, where he dwelt.
Dreadful was the rattle of his arrows as he went, and his coming was
as the night when it cometh over the sky.  Then he shot the arrows of
death, first on the dogs and the mules, and then on the men; and soon
all along the shore rolled the black smoke from the piles of wood on
which they burnt the bodies of the dead.


O-lym'-pus.


For nine days the shafts of the god went throughout the host; but on
the tenth day Achilles called the people to an assembly.  So Hera
bade him, for she loved the Greeks, and grieved to see them die.
When they were gathered together he stood up among them, and spake to
Agamemnon.


A-chil'-les.  He'-ra.


"Surely it were better to return home, than that we should all perish
here by war or plague.  But come, let us ask some prophet, or priest,
or dreamer of dreams, why it is that Apollo is so wroth with us."

Then stood up Calchas, best of prophets, who knew what had been, and
what was, and what was to come, and spake.


Cal'-chas.  seer, prophet.


"Achilles, thou biddest me tell the people why Apollo is wroth with
them.  Lo!  I will tell thee, but thou must first swear to stand by
me, for I know that what I shall say will anger King Agamemnon, and
it goes ill with common men when kings are angry."

"Speak out, thou wise man!" cried Achilles; "for I swear by Apollo
that while I live no one shall lay hands on thee, no, not Agamemnon's
self, though he be lord of the Greeks."

Then the blameless seer took heart, and spake: "It is not for vow or
offering that Apollo is wroth; it is for his servant the priest, for
he came to ransom his daughter, but Agamemnon scorned him, and would
not let the maiden go.  Now, then, ye must send her back without
ransom, and with her a hundred beasts for sacrifice, so that the
plague may be stayed."

Then Agamemnon stood up in a fury, his eyes blazing like fire.

"Never," he cried, "hast thou spoken good concerning me, ill prophet
that thou art, and now thou tellest me to give up this maiden!  I
will do it, for I would not that the people should perish.  Only take
care, ye Greeks, that there be a share of the spoil for me, for it
would be ill if the lord of all the host should alone be without his
share."

"Nay, my lord Agamemnon," cried Achilles, "thou art too eager for
gain.  We have no treasures out of which we may make up thy loss, for
what we got out of the towns we have either sold or divided; nor
would it be fitting that the people should give back what has been
given to them.  Give up the maiden, then, without conditions, and
when we shall have taken this city of Troy, we will repay thee three
and four fold."

"Nay, great Achilles," said Agamemnon, "thou shalt not cheat me thus.
If the Greeks will give me such a share as I should have, well and
good.  But if not, I will take one for myself, whether it be from
thee, or from Ajax, or from Ulysses; for my share I will have.  But
of this hereafter.  Now let us see that this maiden be sent back.
Let them get ready a ship, and put her therein, and with her a
hundred victims for sacrifice, and let some chief go with the ship,
and see that all things be rightly done."


A'-jax.


Then cried Achilles, and his face was black as a thunder-storm:
"Surely thou art altogether shameless and greedy, and, in truth, an
ill ruler of men.  No quarrel have I with the Trojans.  They never
seized oxen or sheep of mine in my native land, for many mountains
lie between, and a great breadth of roaring sea.  But I have been
fighting in thy cause, and that of thy brother.  Naught carest thou
for that.  Thou leavest me to fight, and sittest in thy tent at ease.
But when the spoil is divided, thine is always the lion's share.
Small indeed is my part, and this, forsooth, thou wilt take away!
Now am I resolved to go home.  I have no mind to heap up goods and
gold for thee, and be myself dishonoured."

And King Agamemnon answered: "Go, and thy Myrmidons with thee!  I
have other chieftains as good as thou art, and ready, as thou art
not, to pay me due respect; and Zeus is with me.  I hate thee, for
thou always lovest war and strife.  And as for the matter of the
spoil, know that I will take thy share, the girl Briseis, and fetch
her myself, if need be, that all may know that I am sovereign lord
here in the host of the Greeks."


Myr-mi-dons, the soldiers of Achilles.  Bri-se'-is.


Then Achilles was mad with anger, and he thought in his heart, "Shall
I arise and slay him, or shall I keep down the wrath in my breast?"
And as he thought he laid his hand on his sword-hilt, and had half
drawn his sword from the scabbard, when lo! the goddess Athene stood
behind him (for Hera, who loved both chieftains had sent her), and
caught him by the long locks of his yellow hair.  Achilles marvelled
much to feel the mighty grasp, and turned, and looked, and knew the
goddess, but no one else in the assembly could see her.  Terrible was
the flash of his eyes as he cried: "Art thou come, child of Zeus, to
see the insolence of Agamemnon?  Of a truth, I think that he will
perish for his folly."


A-the'-ne.


But Athene said: "Nay, I am come from heaven to calm thy wrath, if
thou wilt hear me; white-armed Hera sent me, for she loveth and
cherisheth you both alike.  Draw not thy sword; but use bitter words,
even as thou wilt.  Of a truth, I tell thee that for this insolence
of to-day he will bring thee hereafter splendid gifts, threefold and
fourfold for all that he may take away.  Only restrain thyself and do
my bidding."

Then Achilles answered: "I will abide by thy command in spite of my
wrath, for the man who hearkens to the immortal gods is also heard by
them."  And as he spake he laid his heavy hand upon the hilt, and
thrust back the sword into the scabbard, and Athene went her way to
Olympus.

Then he turned him to King Agamemnon, and spake again, for his anger
was not spent: "Drunkard, with the eyes of a dog and the heart of a
deer! never fighting in the front of the battle, nor daring to lie in
the ambush!  This I tell thee, and confirm my words with a mighty
oath--by this sceptre do I swear.  Once it was the branch of a tree;
and as surely as it shall never again have bark, or leaves, or
shoots, so surely shall the Greeks one day miss Achilles, when they
fall in heaps before the dreadful Hector; and thou shalt eat thy
heart for rage, to think that thou hast wronged the bravest of thy
host."

And as he spake he dashed the sceptre upon the ground, and sat down.
And on the other side Agamemnon sat in furious anger.  Then Nestor
rose, an old man of a hundred years and more, and counselled peace.
Let them listen, he said, to his counsel.  Great chiefs in the old
days, with whom no man now alive would dare to fight, had listened to
him.  Let not Agamemnon take away from the bravest of the Greeks the
prize of war; let not Achilles, though he was mightier in battle than
all other men, contend with Agamemnon, who was sovereign lord of all
the hosts of Greece.  But he spake in vain.  For Agamemnon answered:--

"Nestor, thou speakest well, and peace is good.  But this fellow
would lord it over all; yet there are some, methinks, who will not
obey him.  For if the immortal gods have made him a great warrior, do
they therefore grant him leave to speak lawless words?  Verily he
must be taught that there is one here, at least, who is better than
he."

And Achilles said: "I would be a slave and a coward if I owned thee
as my lord.  Play the master over others, but think not to master me.
As for the prize which the Greeks gave me, let them do as they will.
They gave it; let them take it away.  But if thou darest to touch
aught that is mine own, that hour thy life-blood shall redden on my
spear."

Then the assembly was dismissed.  Chryseis was sent to her home with
due offerings to the god, the wise Ulysses going with her.  And all
the people purified themselves, and offered sacrifices to the gods;
and the sweet savour went up to heaven in the wreathing smoke.

But King Agamemnon would not go back from his purpose, So he called
to him the heralds, Talthybius and Eurybates, and said:--


Tal-thyb'-i-us.  Eu-ryb'-a-tes.


"Heralds, go to the tents of Achilles, and fetch the maiden Briseis.
But if he will not let her go, say that I will come myself with many
others to fetch her; and it will be the worse for him."

Sorely against their will the heralds went.  Along the seashore they
walked, till they came to where, amidst the Myrmidons, were the tents
of Achilles.  There they found him, sitting between his tent and his
ship.  He did not rejoice to see them, and they stood in great terror
and shame.  But he knew in his heart wherefore they had come, and
cried aloud: "Come near, ye heralds, messengers of gods and men.
'Tis no fault of yours that ye are come on such an errand."

Then he turned to Patroclus, his dearest friend, and said: "Bring the
maiden from her tent, and let the heralds lead her away.  But let
them be witnesses, before gods and men, and before this evil-minded
king, that the day will come when he shall have sore need of me to
save his host from destruction."


Pa-tro'-clus.


Then Patroclus brought forth the maiden from her tent, and gave her
to the heralds.  And they led her away, sorely against her will.  But
Achilles went apart from his comrades, and sat upon the seashore,
falling into a great passion of tears, and stretching out his hands
with loud prayer to his mother, Thetis, daughter of the sea.  She
heard him where she sat in the depths by her father, the old god of
the sea, and rose from the gray sea, as a vapour rises, and came to
where he sat weeping, and stroked him with her hand, and hailed him
by his name.


The'-tis.


"What ails thee, my son?" she said.

Then he told her the story of his wrong, and when he had ended he
said:--

"Go, I pray thee, to the top of Olympus, to the palace of Zeus.
Often have I heard thee boast how, long ago, thou didst help him when
the other gods would have bound him, fetching Briareus of the hundred
hands, who sat by him in his strength, so that the gods feared to
touch him.  Go now, and call these things to his mind, and pray him
that he help the sons of Troy, and give them victory in the battle,
so that the Greeks, as they flee before them, may have joy of this
king of theirs, who has done such wrong to the bravest of his host."


Bri-a'-re-us.


And his mother answered him: "Surely thine is an evil lot, my son.
Thy life is short, and it should of right be without tears and full
of joy; but now it seems to me to be both short and sad.  But I will
go as thou sayest to Olympus, to the palace of Zeus; but not now, for
he has gone, and the other gods with him, to a twelve days' feast
with the pious Ethiopians.  But when he comes back I will entreat and
persuade him.  And do thou sit still, nor go forth to battle."

Meanwhile Ulysses drew near to Chryse with the holy offerings.  And
when they were come within the haven, they furled the sail, and laid
it in the ship, and lowered the mast, and rowed the ship to her
moorings.  They cast out the anchor stones, and made fast the cables
from the stern.  After that they landed, taking with them the
offerings and the maid Chryseis.  To the altar they brought the maid,
and gave her into the arms of her father, and the wise Ulysses said:
"See now; Agamemnon, king of men, sends back thy daughter, and with
her a hundred beasts for sacrifice, that we may appease the god who
hath smitten the Greeks in his wrath."

Then the priest received his daughter right gladly, and when they had
ranged the beasts about the altar, then the priest prayed, "Hear me,
God of the silver bow!  If before thou didst hearken to my prayer,
and grievously afflict the Greeks, so hear me now, and stay this
plague which is come upon them."

So prayed he, and the god gave ear.

Then they slew the cattle, and flayed them, and burned an offering to
the gods.  Then they cut up the rest, and broiled the pieces
carefully on spits.  This being done, they made their meal, nor did
any one lack his share.  And when the meal was ended, then they
poured a little wine into the cups to serve for an offering to the
gods.  After that they sat till sunset, singing a hymn to the Archer
God, and making merry; and he heard their voice and was pleased.

When the sun went down they slept beside the stern-cables; and when
the dawn appeared then they embarked, raising the mast and spreading
the sail; and Apollo sent them a favouring wind, and the dark blue
wave hissed about the ship as she went: so they came to the camp of
the Greeks.

But all the time Achilles sat in wrath beside his ships; he went not
to the war, nor yet to the assembly, but sat fretting in his heart,
because he longed for the cry of the battle.




CHAPTER II

THE ASSEMBLY

When the twelfth day was come, Thetis rose out of the sea, and went
to high Olympus.  There she found Zeus sitting apart on the topmost
peak of Olympus, and she knelt down before him; with her left hand
she clasped his knees, and with her right she took his beard, and she
made her prayer unto him.

"O Father Zeus, if ever I have aided thee by word or deed, fulfil now
my prayer.  Give honour, I beseech thee, to Achilles my son, who hath
so short a space of life; for now Agamemnon hath put dishonour upon
him, taking away the gift that the Greeks gave him.  Grant,
therefore, that the men of Troy may for a while gain the victory so
that the Greeks may do honour to my son."

So she spake, and Zeus sat a long time silent; but Thetis would not
loose her hold.  Then she spake again: "Give me now thy promise, and
confirm it with a nod, or else deny me.  So shall I know that I am
held least in honour of all the gods."

Then Zeus made answer much disturbed: "This is a hard matter, for
thou wilt set me at strife with Hera, and she will upbraid me with
bitter words.  Even now she is ever reproaching me, saying that I
favour the men of Troy in the battle.  Therefore go thou away, that
she may not know of thy coming; and I will consider how this thing
may be best accomplished.  And now I will assure my promise with a
nod; for when I give my nod, then the thing may not be repented of or
left undone."

So he spake, and nodded with his dark brows, and the hair waved about
his head, and all Olympus was shaken.

Then Thetis departed, diving into the deep sea, and Zeus went to his
own house, and all the gods rose up before him.  And when he sat upon
his chair, then Hera, knowing that Thetis of the silver feet had held
counsel with him, addressed him with bitter words.

"Who hath been in council with thee, thou plotter?  Thou dost always
take pleasure, when I am absent, in secret plans, and never tellest
thy thought to me freely."

To her the father of gods and men made reply: "Hera, think not to
know all my thoughts; that would be too hard for thee, even though
thou art my wife.  That which is fitting thou shalt hear first; but
into such counsel as I take by myself inquire thou not."

Hera answered: "What sayest thou?  I have not pried into thy plans.
These thou makest as thou wilt.  And now I sorely fear that Thetis of
the silver feet hath persuaded thee.  At dawn of day I saw her
kneeling before thee; thou hast granted, I doubt not, that Achilles
shall have honour, and that many of the Greeks shall die beside their
ships."

To this Zeus made reply: "Verily nothing escapeth thee, thou witch.
If it be as thou sayest, such is my will.  Do thou sit silent, and
obey.  Else all the gods in Olympus shall not save thee, when I lay
upon thee the hands that none may resist."

Then Hera was afraid, and held her peace, and all the gods were
troubled.  But her son Hephæstus, the smith, spake, saying: "This
indeed will be grievous, if ye two come to strife for the sake of
mortal men, and make trouble among the gods.  If such ill counsels
prevail, what pleasure shall we have in our feasting?  Now will I
advise my mother that she make peace with Zeus, lest he rebuke her
again.  If he were minded to hurl her from these seats, who should
withstand him?"


He-phæs'-tus.


Thereupon he put the double-handled cup into his mother's hand, and
said: "Have patience, mother, for all that thou art vexed, lest I see
thee beaten before mine eyes.  I could not help thee.  Once before
when I would have succoured thee, he grasped me by the foot, and
flung me from the threshold of heaven.  All day I fell, and at sunset
I lighted in Lemnos."

Then Hera smiled, and took the cup from her son.  And he went round
to all the gods, going from left to right as a cupbearer should, and
poured the nectar from the mixing-bowl, and laughter without end
awoke among the blessed gods, when they saw the limping Hephæstus go
puffing through the hall.

Gods and men slept that night; but Zeus slept not, for he thought in
his heart how he might do honour to Achilles.  And as he thought, he
judged it best to send a deceiving dream to Agamemnon.  Therefore he
said: "Go, deceiving Dream, to the swift ships of the Greeks, and
seek the tent of Agamemnon.  Bid him make haste and arm the Greeks,
for he shall surely take the city of Troy."

So the dream went to the tent of Agamemnon, and found him wrapped in
sleep.  It took the shape of Nestor, the old chief, whom the King
honoured more than all besides.

Then the false Nestor spake: "Sleepest thou, Agamemnon?  It is not
for kings to sleep all through the night, for they must take thought
for many, and have many cares.  Listen now to the words of Zeus: 'Set
the battle in array against Troy, for the gods are now of one mind,
and the day of doom is come for the city, and thou shalt take it, and
gain everlasting glory for thyself.'"

And Agamemnon believed the dream.  So he rose from his bed, and
donned his tunic, and put over it a great cloak, and fastened the
sandals on his feet, and hung from his shoulders his mighty
silver-studded sword, and took in his right hand the great sceptre of
his house, which was the token of his sovereignty over all the Greeks.

First he called a council of the chiefs by the ship of King Nestor;
and when they were seated, he said: "Hear me, my friends.  This night
a dream came to me in my sleep; most like it was to Nestor.  Above my
head it stood, and said: 'Thou sleepest, son of Atreus.  It is not
for kings to sleep all through the night.  Now mark my word; I come
to thee from Zeus, who careth for thee, though he be far away.  He
bids thee call the Greeks to battle, for now thou shalt take the city
of Troy.'  So spake the Dream.  Come, therefore, let us rouse the
Greeks; but first I will try their spirit, counselling them to flee
to their homes, and do ye dissuade them."

Then up rose Nestor in his place and spake: "Had any other told us
this dream, we had thought it false; but seeing that he who hath seen
it is chief among us, let us call the people to arms."

Then the heralds made proclamation, and the people hastened to their
places.  Even as the bees swarm from a hollow rock and cluster about
the flowers of spring, and some fly this way and some that, so the
many tribes marched from the ships and the tents to the place of the
assembly.  Great was the confusion and great the uproar, and nine
heralds sought to quiet the people, that they might listen to the
speaking of the kings; and at the last the Greeks ceased from their
shouting, and sat in their places.

Then Agamemnon rose up, holding the sceptre in his hand, and spake
thus: "O my friends, ill hath Zeus dealt with me.  He promised me
that I should take the city of Troy, and so return to my home.  But
his words were deceitful, for now he bids me go back to Argos.  Nine
years have passed, and the timbers of our ships are rotted, and the
rigging is worn; and our wives and our children sit at home and wait
for us.  Come, therefore, let us flee to the land of our fathers, for
Troy we may not take."

So spake the King, and stirred the hearts of the people; that is to
say, of all that knew not his secret counsel.  All the assembly was
moved as the sea is moved, when the east wind raiseth the waves, or
as a cornfield, when the strong west wind comes upon it, and shakes
the ears.  Shouting they hasted to the ships, and laid hands on them
to drag them down.

Then would the Greeks have returned home again.  But Hera spake to
Athene: "Will the Greeks thus idly flee to their homes? and will they
leave Helen to Priam and to Troy,--Helen, for whom so many have
fallen far from their fatherland?  Hasten now, and turn them from
their purpose."

So Athene hastened down from Olympus, and she found Ulysses, who had
laid no hand upon his ship, for grief had touched him to his heart.
To him she said: "Son of Laertes, will ye indeed flee to your
fatherland, and leave Helen, for whom so many have fallen, to be a
boast to Priam and the men of Troy?  Go now, and dissuade the Greeks,
and suffer them not to drag their ships to the sea."


La-er'-tes.


And when Ulysses heard the voice of the goddess, he cast away his
cloak, and ran.  King Agamemnon gave him his sceptre, and, bearing
that, he went among the ships.  When he saw a chief, he said with
gentle words, "Hold, sir, it ill becomes thee to be a coward; sit
still and hold the people back.  Thou knowest not the mind of the
King; he did but make trial of the spirit of the Greeks.  Anger him
not, lest he do some mischief to the people."

But when he saw a common man, he smote him with his sceptre, and
said: "Fellow, sit still, and listen to them that are better than
thou.  Let there be one master, one king, to whom Zeus has given
authority."

Thus did he turn them from their purpose.  And they hasted again to
the assembly with such a noise as when a wave breaks along the shore.

But, when all the rest were silent, Thersites alone jeered at the
princes, that he might move laughter among the Greeks.  Most
ill-favoured was he of all that came to Troy, bandy-legged, and
halting on one foot, with a hump on his back, narrow-chested, and his
head misshapen, with straggling hair thereon.  Loud he shouted now,
reviling Agamemnon:--


Ther-si'-tes.


"What lackest thou yet, son of Atreus?  Full of bronze are thy tents,
and many are the fair women whom we have given thee.  Wantest thou
more than these?  Surely a leader of men should not bring the Greeks
into trouble.  And ye, who are women rather than men, why sail ye not
home, and leave this man to gorge himself with his spoils alone?  For
now he hath wronged Achilles, taking away his gift--Achilles, who is
far better than he.  Surely Achilles is mild of temper, or this, son
of Atreus, had been thy last wrong-doing!"

Thereupon Ulysses rose up beside him, and spake in wrath: "Peace,
babbler; take not the name of kings upon thy lips, nor taunt thy
betters.  Hearken now to me: if I hear thee speak idle words again as
thou hast done this day, I will surely strip from off thee cloak and
tunic, and drive thee to the ships with shameful blows."  So
speaking, he smote him with the sceptre on back and shoulders; and a
bloody weal rose up beneath the blow.  All dazed, the fellow cowered
down and wiped away his tears.

Merrily laughed the others, saying one to his neighbour: "Often hath
Ulysses done well, but never better than now, when he hath stopped
this babbler's tongue.  He will not rail against the kings again."

Then Ulysses stood up to speak, holding the sceptre in his hand; and
Athene stood by his side, in the likeness of a herald, bidding the
people keep silence, that all, nearest and farthest alike, might hear
his words.

"Now, O King," he said, "the Greeks are shaming thee, abiding no more
by their promise which they made thee coming from Argos; that they
would not return till they had taken the city of Troy.  Truly there
is toil enough here to make us sick of heart and wishful to return.
For a man will feel weary if he be kept but a single moon from his
wife by winter winds and stormy sea, and we have lingered here for
twelve moons nine times told.  But it is not well to tarry long and
come back empty-handed, after all.  Ye all remember the prophecy that
was given when we set sail from Greece,--all whom death hath not
carried away,--that for nine years we should make war, and in the
tenth we should take the fair city of Troy.  Remain, therefore, ye
Greeks, till ye have taken Priam's mighty town."

So he spake, and all the Greeks shouted in assent; and the ships sent
back the shout as if it had been thunder.

Then King Agamemnon stood up, and said: "Go now to your meal, and
afterwards we will join the battle.  Let every man whet well his
spear, and fit his shield, and feed his horses abundantly, and look
to his chariot, that all day long we may fight, and cease not, even
for a little space, till night shall come and separate the hosts.
Truly the band of the shield shall grow wet, and the hand be weary
that holdeth the spear, and the horse shall sweat that draweth the
polished chariot.  And whoever holdeth back from the fight, tarrying
at the ships, nothing shall save him from feeding the dogs and the
fowls of the air."

Then the Greeks shouted again.  Quickly did they scatter themselves
among the ships and the tents, and make their meal.  And Agamemnon
made a feast, and called thereto the chiefs, Nestor and Idomeneus,
and Ajax the Greater and Ajax the Less, and Diomed, and Ulysses; but
Menelaus came uncalled, knowing that he would be welcome.


I-do'-me-neus.  Di'-o-med.


Then King Agamemnon stood up and prayed: "O Zeus, let not the sun set
and the darkness fall before I humble Priam's roof in the dust, and
burn his doors with fire, and rend the coat of Hector on his breast!"

So he prayed, but Zeus hearkened not.

And when the feast was ended, the chiefs marshalled their hosts for
the battle; and Athene in the midst swept through the host, urging
them to the conflict; and in every heart she roused the delight of
battle, so that there was no man but would have chosen war rather
than to return to his home.  As is the flare of a great fire when a
wood is burning on a hilltop, so was the flash of their arms and
their armour, as they thronged to the field.  And as the countless
flocks of wild geese or cranes or swans now wheel and now settle in
the great Asian swamp, or as the bees swarm in the spring, when the
milk-pails are full, so thick the Greeks thronged to the battle in
the great plain by the banks of the Scamander.


Sca-man'-der.




CHAPTER III

THE DUEL OF PARIS AND MENELAUS

So now the hosts drew near to battle.  With many a cry the men of
Troy came on, clamorous as a flock of cranes when they fly southward
from the winter and the rain.  But the Greeks marched in silence,
resolute to stand by one another in the battle; and beneath their
feet rose up a great cloud of dust, thick as the mist which the south
wind brings over the mountain-tops.

They were now about to fight, when from the ranks of the Trojans
Paris rushed forth.  He had a panther's skin over his shoulders, and
a bow and a sword, and in either hand a spear, and he called aloud to
the Greeks that they should send forth their bravest to fight with
him.  But when Menelaus saw him he was glad, for he said that now he
should avenge himself on the man who had done him such wrong.  He
leapt from his chariot and rushed to meet his enemy; but Paris was
afraid when he saw Menelaus, and fled back into the ranks of his
comrades, just as a man steps back in haste when unawares in a
mountain glen he comes upon a snake.  But Hector saw him, and rebuked
him: "Fair art thou to look upon, Paris, but nothing worth.  Surely
the Greeks will scorn us if they think that thou art our bravest
warrior, because thou art of stately presence.  But thou art a
coward; and yet thou daredst to go across the sea and carry off the
fair Helen.  Why dost thou not stand and abide the onset of her
husband, and see what manner of man he is?  Little would thy harp and
thy long locks and thy fair face avail when thou wert lying in the
dust!  A craven race are the sons of Troy, or they would have stoned
thee ere this."

Then Paris answered: "Thou speakest well, Hector, and thy rebuke is
just.  As for thee, thy heart is like iron, ever set on battle; yet
are beauty and love also the gifts of the gods, and not to be
despised.  But now set Menelaus and me in the midst, and let us
fight, man to man, for the fair Helen and for all her possessions.
And if he prevail over me, let him take her and them and depart, and
the Greeks with him, leaving you to dwell in peace; but if I prevail
they shall depart without her."

Then Hector was glad, and going before the Trojan ranks, holding his
spear by the middle, he kept them back.  But the Greeks would have
shot at him with arrows and slung stones, only Agamemnon cried aloud
and said, "Hold, Hector has somewhat to say to us."

Then Hector said: "Hear, Trojans and Greeks, what Paris saith, Paris
who hath bred this quarrel between us: 'Let all lay their arms upon
the ground, and let Menelaus and me fight for the fair Helen, and all
her wealth.  And let him that is the better keep her and them, but
the rest shall swear faith and friendship.'"

Then Menelaus stood up and spake: "Listen to me, for this trouble
toucheth me nearer than you all.  The Greeks and the men of Troy
would fain be at peace, for they have suffered grievous things
because of my quarrel and of the wrong that Paris did.  Therefore we
two will fight together, and let him perish who is doomed to die.
Bring two sheep, ye men of Troy, a white wether for the sun, and a
black ewe for the earth, and we will bring another for Zeus.  And let
Priam himself come, and do sacrifice, and take the oath.  Young men
are ever changeable; but when an old man is among them, he taketh
thought for all."

So spake Menelaus; and both the armies were glad, hoping to see an
end of the war.

Then Hector sent a herald to the city, to summon Priam to the
sacrifice and to fetch the sheep.  And while he went, Iris, in the
guise of Laodice, fairest of the daughters of Priam, came to Helen,
where she sat in her hall, weaving a great web of double breadth and
dyed with purple, whereon she had wrought many battles of the Greeks
and the men of Troy, Iris came near and said:


La-o'-di-ce.


"Come, dear sister, and behold this marvel.  Heretofore the Greeks
and the men of Troy have fought together on the plain, but now they
sit in peace, and the war is stayed; for Paris and Menelaus are to
fight for thee, and thou shalt be the wife of him that shall prevail."

So spake the goddess, and roused in Helen sweet longing for her
former husband, and her city, and her parents.  So she wrapped
herself in white apparel, and went forth from her chamber.

Meanwhile Priam sat on the wall with the old men.  They had ceased
from war, but in speech they were to be admired; they were like to
the crickets that sit upon a tree in the wood, and send forth a thin,
sweet voice.  And as they talked, the fair Helen came near, and they
said: "What wonder that men should suffer much for such a woman, for
indeed she is divinely fair!  Yet let her depart in the ships, nor
bring a curse on us and our children."

But Priam called to her: "Come near, my daughter, that thou mayest
see him that was thy husband, and thy friends and kinsmen.  I find no
fault with thee, for 'tis not thou, 'tis the gods who have brought
about all this trouble.  But tell me, who is this warrior that I see,
so fair and strong?  There are others even a head taller than he, but
none of such majesty."

And Helen answered: "Ah, my father!  I owe thee much reverence; yet
would that I had died before I left husband and child to follow thy
son.  But as for this warrior, he is Agamemnon, a good king and brave
soldier, and my brother-in-law in the old days."

"Happy Agamemnon," said Priam, "to rule over so many!  Never saw I
such an army gathered together.  But who is this that I see, not so
tall as Agamemnon, but of broader shoulders?  His arms lie upon the
ground, and he is walking through the ranks of his men just as some
great ram walks through a flock of sheep."

"This," said Helen, "is Ulysses of Ithaca, who is better in craft and
counsel than all other men."

"'Tis well spoken, lady," said Antenor.  "Well I remember Ulysses
when he came hither on an embassy about thee with the brave Menelaus.
My guests they were, and I knew them well.  And I remember how, in
the assembly of the Trojans, when both were standing, Menelaus was
the taller, but when they sat, Ulysses was the more majestic to
behold.  And when they rose to speak, Menelaus said few words, but
said them wisely and well; and Ulysses--you had thought him a fool,
so stiffly he held his sceptre and so downcast were his eyes; but as
soon as he began, oh! the mighty voice, and the words thick as the
falling snow!"


An-te'-nor.


Then Priam said, "Who is that stalwart hero, so tall and strong,
overtopping all by head and shoulders?"

"That," said Helen, "is mighty Ajax, the bulwark of the Greeks.  And
next to him is Idomeneus.  Often has Menelaus had him as his guest in
the old days, when he came from Crete.  As for the other chiefs, I
see and could name them all.  But I miss my own dear brothers,
Castor, tamer of horses, and Pollux, the mighty boxer.  Either they
came not from Sparta, or, having come, shun the meeting of men for
shame of me."

So she spake, and knew not that they were sleeping their last sleep
far away in their dear fatherland.

Meanwhile the heralds were bringing the sheep from the town, and wine
in a goatskin; and Idæus, the herald, carried a bowl and golden cups.
He came near to King Priam, and told him how the armies called for
him.  So he went, and he, on the one side, for the Trojans, and King
Agamemnon for the Greeks, made a covenant with sacrifice that Paris
and Menelaus should fight together, and that the fair Helen, with all
her treasures, should go with him who should prevail.


I-dæ'-us.


And when the sacrifice and the prayers were ended, King Priam said:
"I will go back to Troy, for I could not endure to see my son
fighting with Menelaus.  But which of the two is doomed to death,
Zeus and the immortal gods only know."

So he spake and climbed into his chariot and took the reins; so he
went back to Troy even as he came.

And afterwards Hector and Ulysses marked out a space for the fight,
and Hector shook two pebbles in a helmet, looking away as he shook
them, that he whose pebble leapt forth the first should be the first
to throw his spear.  And so it befell that the lot of Paris leapt
forth first.  Then the two warriors armed themselves, and came forth
into the space, and stood over against each other, brandishing their
spears, with hate in their eyes.  Then Paris threw his spear.  It
struck the shield of Menelaus, but pierced it not, for the spear
point was bent back.  Then Menelaus prayed to Zeus: "Grant, Father
Zeus, that I may avenge myself on Paris, who has done me this wrong;
so shall men in after time fear to do wrong to their host."  So
speaking, he cast his long-shafted spear.  It struck the shield of
Paris and pierced it through, and passed through the corselet, and
through the tunic; but Paris shrank aside, and the spear wounded him
not.  Then Menelaus drew his silver-studded sword and struck a mighty
blow on the top of the helmet of Paris, but the sword broke in four
pieces in his hand.  Then he cried in his wrath, "O Zeus, most
mischief-loving of the gods, my spear I cast in vain, and now my
sword is broken."  Then he rushed forward and seized Paris by the
helmet, and dragged him towards the hosts of the Greeks, for he was
choked by the band of the helmet.  And truly he had taken him, but
Aphrodite loosed the strap that was beneath the chin, and the helmet
came off in his hand.  And Menelaus whirled it among the Greeks and
charged with another spear in his hand.  But Aphrodite snatched Paris
away, covering him with a mist, and put him down in his chamber in
Troy.  Then Menelaus looked for him everywhere, but no one could tell
him where he might be.  No son of Troy would have hidden him out of
kindness, for all hated him as death.


Aph-ro-di'-te.


Then King Agamemnon said, "Now, ye sons of Troy, it is for you to
give back the fair Helen and her wealth, and to pay me, besides, so
much as may be fitting for all my cost and trouble."

So spake King Agamemnon, and the Greeks applauded.




CHAPTER IV

THE BROKEN OATH

Meanwhile the gods sat in council in the hall of Zeus; and fair Hebe
poured out for them the nectar, and they pledged each other in cups
of gold, looking down upon the city of Troy.  Then spake Zeus,
seeking to provoke Hera with taunting words:--


He'-be.


"Two helpers hath Menelaus among the goddesses, even Hera and Athene.
But now they sit still and take their pleasure, while Aphrodite
walketh beside Paris, and delivereth him from instant death.  Yet,
seeing that Menelaus hath prevailed, let us consider what shall next
be done.  Shall we stir up war again, or make peace between the
hosts?  If it please you to make peace, then let Menelaus take Helen
to his home again, and let Priam's city continue."

So he spake.  But Hera and Athene sat wrathful side by side,
meditating evil in their hearts against the men of Troy.  Athene kept
silence, in spite of the fury that raged within her, but Hera could
not contain her wrath, and spake:--

"What is this thou sayest?  Wouldst thou make void all my toil and
trouble, with which I have gathered this people together, that Priam
and his sons may be destroyed?  Do as thou wilt; but it pleaseth not
the other gods."

To her Zeus spake in answer wrathfully: "Tell us what evil have Priam
and the sons of Priam done in thy sight that thou desirest so
pitilessly the downfall of this fair city of Troy?  Verily wert thou
to pass within the gates, and eat Priam raw, and his sons with him,
then might thy hate be satisfied.  Do, then, as thou wilt.  Let not
this matter breed ill-will betwixt me and thee.  Yet remember what I
say.  If I be minded to destroy in time to come some city that thou
lovest, say me not nay, nor hinder me, for in this have I yielded to
thy will.  Verily of all the cities of men that lie beneath the
stars, I have loved Troy the best.  Never there has my altar failed
of feast and banquet and the sweet savour that is the due of gods."

Then Hera answered: "Three cities have I that I love, Argos and
Sparta and Mycenæ.  If they have offended thee, destroy them; I
begrudge them not; nor, indeed, could I withstand thy will.  Yet my
toil also should not be made vain; for I, too, am a daughter of
Chronos, and first in place among the immortals, seeing that I am thy
wife, who art the King.  Come, therefore, let us yield to one
another, and the other gods will follow us.  Let now Athene go down,
and bring it to pass that some one of the Trojans begin the strife
and break the truce."


My-ce'-næ.


Thus she ended, and Zeus said not nay, but spake straightway to
Athene: "Make haste, get thee down to the host, and bring it to pass
that the men of Troy break the truce."

So Athene sped down from the top of Olympus, like to a star which
Zeus sends as a sign to sailors on the sea, or to some host that
goeth forth to battle; and wonder cometh upon all that behold it.

Among the host of Troy she went, taking upon herself the shape of
Laodocus, son of Antenor, and went to Pandarus, where he stood among
his men.  Then the false Laodocus said: "Pandarus, darest thou aim an
arrow at Menelaus.  Truly the Trojans would love thee well, and Paris
best of all, if they could see Menelaus slain by an arrow from thy
bow.  Aim then, but first pray to Apollo, and vow that thou wilt
offer a hundred beasts when thou returnest to thy city."


La-o'-do-cus.  Pan'-da-rus.


Now Pandarus had a bow made of the horns of a wild goat which he had
slain; sixteen palms long were the horns, and a cunning workman had
made them smooth, and put a tip of gold whereon to fasten the
bow-string.  And Pandarus strung his bow, his comrades hiding him
with their shields.  Then he took an arrow from his quiver, and laid
it on the bow-string, and drew the string to his breast, till the
arrow-head touched the bow, and let fly.  Right well aimed was the
dart, but it was not the will of heaven that it should slay Menelaus.
For the daughter of Zeus stood before him, and turned aside the
shaft, waving it from him as a mother waveth a fly from her child
when he lieth asleep.  She guided it to where the golden clasps of
the belt came together, and the breast-plate overlapped.  It passed
through the belt, and through the corselet, and through the girdle,
and pierced the skin.  Then the red blood rushed out and stained the
white skin.

Sore dismayed was King Agamemnon to see the blood; sore dismayed also
was the brave Menelaus, till he spied the barb of the arrow, and knew
that the wound was not deep.  But Agamemnon cried: "It was in an evil
hour for thee, my brother, that I made a covenant with these false
sons of Troy.  Right well, indeed, I know that oath and sacrifice are
not in vain.  For though Zeus fulfil not now his purpose, yet will he
take vengeance at the last, and the guilty shall suffer, they and
their wives, and their children.  Troy shall fall; but woe is me if
thou shouldst die, Menelaus.  For the Greeks will straightway go back
to their fatherland, and the fair Helen will be left a boast to the
sons of Troy, and I shall have great shames when one of them shall
say, as he leaps on the tomb of the brave Menelaus, 'Surely the great
Agamemnon has avenged himself well; for he brought an army hither,
but now has gone back to his home, and left Menelaus here.'  May the
earth swallow me up before that day!"

"Nay," said Menelaus; "fear not, for the arrow hath but grazed the
skin."

Then King Agamemnon bade fetch Machaon, the physician.  And Machaon
came, and drew forth the arrow, and when he had wiped away the blood
he put healing drugs upon the wound.


Ma-cha'-on.


But while this was doing, King Agamemnon went throughout the host,
and if he saw any one stirring himself to get ready for the battle he
praised him and gave him good encouragement; but whomsoever he saw
halting and lingering and slothful, him he blamed and rebuked,
whether he were common man or chief.

So he passed through all the host.  And the Greeks went forward to
the battle, as the waves that curl themselves, then dash upon the
shore, throwing high the foam.  In order they went after their
chiefs; you would have thought then dumb, so silent were they.  But
the Trojans were like a flock of ewes which wait to be milked, and
bleat hearing the voice of their lambs, so confused a cry went out
from their army, for there were men of many tongues gathered
together.  And on either side the gods urged them on.




CHAPTER V

THE VALIANT DEEDS OF DIOMED

When the armies were come into one place, they dashed together with
buckler and spear: and there was a great crash of shields that met.
Next rose up a great moaning of them that were stricken down, and
shouting of the conquerors; and the ground ran with blood.  As when
two torrents, swollen with rains of winter, join their waters in a
hollow ravine at the meeting of the glens, and the shepherds hear the
din far off among the hills, even so, with a mighty noise and great
confusion, did the two armies meet.

Then did the Greeks beat back the men of Troy.  And each of the
chiefs slew a foe; but there was none like Diomed, who raged through
the battle so furiously that you could not tell with which host he
was, whether with the Greeks or with the sons of Troy.  Then Pandarus
aimed an arrow at him, and smote him in the right shoulder as he was
rushing forward, and cried aloud: "On, great-hearted sons of Troy,
the bravest of the Greeks is wounded!  Soon, methinks, will his
strength fail him, unless Apollo has deceived me."

So he spake exulting, but the arrow quelled not Diomed.  Only he
leapt down from the chariot, and spake to Sthenelus, his charioteer,
"Come down, and draw this arrow from my shoulder."  Then Sthenelus
drew it, and the blood spurted out from the wound.  And Diomed prayed
to Athene: "O Goddess, if ever thou didst love my father, and stand
beside him in the fiery war, be thou a friend to me also; let me come
within a spear's cast of this man who hath wounded me, and who
boasteth himself over me, saying that I shall not long look upon the
shining of the sun."


Sthen'-e-lus.


So he prayed, and Athene heard; and she made light his hands and his
feet, and stood beside him, and spake: "Be bold now, O Diomed, and
fight with the men of Troy!  I have breathed into thy heart the
spirit that was in thy father, and I have taken away the mist that
was upon thy eyes, that thou mayest know god from man.  Fight not
thou with any of the immortals, if a god should come in thy way; only
if Aphrodite comes into the battle, her thou mayest wound."

So spake Athene, and went her way; and Diomed turned back to the
battle, and mingled with the foremost.  Eager he had been before to
fight, but now his eagerness was increased threefold.  Even as a lion
whom a shepherd wounds a little as he leaps into the fold, but kills
not, and the man escapes into his house, and the sheep flee in their
terror, falling huddled in a heap, even so did Diomed rage among the
men of Troy.

Æneas saw him, and thought how he might stay him in his course.  So
he passed through the host till he found Pandarus.  "Pandarus," he
said, "where are thy bow and arrows?  See how this man deals death
through the ranks.  Send a shaft at him, first making thy prayer to
Zeus."


Æ-ne'-as.


Then Pandarus answered: "This man, methinks, is Diomed.  The shield
and the helmet and the horses are his.  And yet I know not whether he
is not a god.  Some god, at least, stands by him and guards him.  But
now I sent an arrow at him, and smote him on the shoulder, right
through the corselet, and thought that I had slain him; but lo! I
have harmed him not at all.  And now I know not what to do, for here
I have no chariot.  I came, trusting in my bow, and lo! it has failed
me these two times.  Two of the chiefs I have hit, Menelaus and
Diomed, and from each have seen the red blood flow, yet have I not
harmed them.  Surely, if ever I return safe to my home, I will break
this useless bow."

"Nay," said Æneas, "talk not thus.  Climb into my chariot, and see
what horses we have in Troy.  They will carry us safe to the city,
even should Diomed prevail against us.  Take thou the rein and the
whip, and I will fight; or, if thou wilt, fight thou, and I will
drive."

"Nay," said Pandarus, "let the horses have the driver whom they know.
It might lose us both, should we turn to flee, and they linger or
start aside, missing their master's voice."

So Pandarus mounted the chariot, and they drove together against
Diomed.  And Sthenelus saw them coming, and said to his comrades: "I
see two mighty warriors.  It would be well that we should go back to
our chariot."

But Diomed frowned, and said: "Talk not of going back.  Thou wilt
talk in vain to me.  As for my chariot, I care not for it.  As I am
will I go against these men.  Both shall not return safe, even if one
should escape.  But do thou stay my chariot where it is, tying the
reins to the rail; and if I slay these men, mount the chariot of
Æneas and drive it into the host of the Greeks, There are no horses
under the sun such as these, for they are of the breed which Zeus
himself gave to King Tros."

Meanwhile Pandarus and Æneas were coming near, and Pandarus cast his
spear.  Right through the shield of Diomed it passed, and reached the
corselet, and Pandarus cried:--

"Thou art hit in the loin.  This, methinks, will lay thee low."

"Nay," said Diomed, "thou hast missed and not hit at all."

And as he spake he threw his spear.  Through nose and teeth and
tongue it passed, and stood out below the chin.  Headlong from the
chariot he fell, and his armour clashed about him.  Straightway Æneas
leapt off with spear and shield to guard the body of his friend, and
stood as a lion stands over a carcass.  But Diomed lifted a great
stone, such as two men of our day could scarcely carry, and cast it.
It struck Æneas on the hip, crushing the bone.  The hero stooped on
his knee, clutching the ground with his hand, and darkness covered
his eyes.  That hour he would have perished, but his mother Aphrodite
caught him in her white arms, and threw her veil about him.  But even
so, Diomed was loath to let his foe escape, and he rushed on her and
wounded her on the wrist, and the blood gushed out--such blood as
flows in the veins of the immortal gods, who eat not the meat and
drink not the drink of men.  With a loud shriek she dropped her son,
but Apollo caught him up and covered him with a dark mist, lest
perchance one of the Greeks should spy him and slay him.

But Diomed called aloud after Aphrodite: "Haste thee from the battle,
daughter of Zeus.  It is enough for thee to beguile weak women."

Wildly did the goddess rush from the battle.  And Iris, swift as the
winds, took her by the hand, and led her out of the press, for she
was tormented with the pain.  She found Ares on the left of the
field, and knelt before him, begging for his horses with many
prayers.  "Help me, dear brother," she said, "and lend me thy horses
to carry me to Olympus, for I am tormented with a wound which a
mortal man gave me, even Diomed, who would fight with Father Zeus
himself."


A'-res.


Then Ares gave her his chariot, and Iris took the reins, and touched
the horses with the whip.  Speedily came they to Olympus, and then
Iris reined in the horses, and Aphrodite fell on the lap of her
mother Dione, who took her daughter in her arms, and caressed her,
saying:--

"Dear child, which of the immortals hath harmed thee thus?"

Aphrodite answered, "No immortal hath done it, but a mortal man, even
Diomed, who now fighteth with the immortal gods."

But Dione answered: "Bear up and endure thy pain, for many who dwell
in Olympus have suffered pain at the hands of mortal men."


Di-o'-ne.


So spake she, and wiped the moisture from the wound with both her
hands, and the grievous hurt was healed.  But Hera and Athene looked
on and mocked.  And Athene said to Zeus, "Now hath thy daughter been
moving one of the Greek women to follow the Trojans whom she loveth
so well, and lo! she hath wounded her hand with the pin of a golden
brooch."

But the father smiled, and called Aphrodite to him, and said, "My
child, deeds of war are not for thee, but love and marriage; leave
the rest to Athene and Ares."

Meanwhile Diomed sprang upon Æneas, though he knew that Apollo
himself held him.  He regarded not the god, for he was eager to slay
the hero and to strip off his arms.  Thrice he sprang, and thrice
Apollo dashed back his shining shield.  The fourth time Apollo warned
him with awful words, "Beware, Diomed, and fall back, nor think to
match thyself with gods."  But Apollo carried Æneas out of the
battle, and laid him down in his own temple in the citadel of Troy,
and there he was healed of his wound.  And all the while the Trojans
and the Greeks were fighting, as they thought, about his body, for
Apollo had made a likeness of the hero and thrown it down in their
midst.  Then Sarpedon spake to Hector with bitter words:--


Sar-pe'-don.


"Where are thy boasts, Hector?  Thou saidst that thou couldst guard
thy city, without thy people or thy allies, thou alone, with thy
brothers and thy brothers-in-law.  But I cannot see even one of them.
They go and hide themselves, as dogs before a lion.  It is we, your
allies, who maintain the battle.  I have come from far to help thy
people, nor do I shrink from the fight, but thou shouldst do thy
part."

And the words stung Hector to the heart.  He leapt from his chariot
and went through the host, urging them to the battle.  And on the
other side the Greeks strengthened themselves.  But Ares brought back
Æneas whole from his wound, and gave him courage and might.  Right
glad were his comrades to see him, nor did they ask him any question;
scant leisure was there for questions that day.  Then were done many
valiant deeds nor did any bear himself more bravely than Æneas.

But all the while Hector, with Ares at his side, dealt death and
destruction through the ranks of the Greeks.  Hera and Athene saw him
where they sat on the top of Olympus, and were wroth.  So they went
to Father Zeus, and prayed that it might be lawful to them to stop
him in his fury.  And Zeus said, "Be it as you will."  So they yoked
the horses to the chariot of Hera and passed down to earth, the
horses flying at every stride over so much space as a man sees who
sits upon a cliff and looks across the sea to where it meets the sky.
They alighted on the spot where the two rivers join their streams.
There they loosed the horses from the yoke, and then sped like doves
to where the bravest of the Greeks stood round King Diomed.  There
Hera took the shape of Stentor with the lungs of bronze, whose voice
was as the voice of fifty men, and cried: "Shame, men of Greece!
When Achilles went to the battle, the men of Troy came not beyond the
gates, but now they fight far from the city, even by the ships."  But
Athene went to Diomed, where he stood wiping away the blood from the
wound where Pandarus had struck him with the arrow.  And she spake:
"Surely the son of Tydeus is little like to his sire.  Small of
stature was he, but a keen fighter.  But thou--whether it be
weariness or fear that keeps thee back I know not--canst scarcely be
a true son of Tydeus."


Ty'-deus.


But Diomed answered: "Nay, great goddess, for I know thee who thou
art, daughter of Zeus, it is not weariness or fear that keeps me
back.  'Tis thy own command that I heed.  Thou didst bid me fight
with none other of the immortal gods but only with Aphrodite, should
she come to the battle.  Therefore I give place, for I see Ares
lording it through the ranks of war."

Then Athene spake: "Heed not Ares; drive thy chariot at him, and
smite him with the spear.  This very morning he promised that he
would help the Greeks, and now he hath changed his purpose."

And as she spake she pushed Sthenelus, who drove the chariot, so that
he leapt out upon the ground, and she mounted herself and caught the
reins and lashed the horses.  But Athene had donned the helmet of
Hades, which whosoever puts on straightway becomes invisible, for she
would not that Ares should see who she was.  The god saw Diomed come
near, and cast his spear over the yoke of the chariot, eager to slay
the hero.  But Athene caught the spear in her hand, and turned it
aside, so that it flew vainly through the air.  Then Diomed in turn
thrust forward his spear, and Athene leant upon it, so that it
pierced the loin of Ares, where his girdle was clasped.  And Ares
shouted with the pain, loud as a host of men, thousands nine or ten,
shouts when it joins in battle.  And the Greeks and Trojans trembled
as they heard.  And Diomed saw the god go up to Olympus as a
thunder-cloud goes up when the wind of the south blows hot.


Ha'-des, the god of the underworld.


By the side of Zeus did he sit down, and showed the immortal blood as
it flowed from the wound, and cried: "Father Zeus, canst thou contain
thyself, seeing such deeds as these?  See now this daughter of thine,
how she is bent on evil and mischief.  All we that dwell in Olympus
are obedient to thee; but her thou checkest not with word or deed.
And now she hath set on this bold Diomed to wreak his madness on the
immortal gods: first he wounded Aphrodite on the wrist; then he
rushed on me; my swift feet bare me away, else surely I had suffered
the pains of death among the carcasses of the slain."

But Zeus frowned on him, and spake: "Come not to me with thy
complaints, for of all the Olympian gods thou vexest me the most, for
battle and strife are ever dear to thee.  'Tis thy mother Hera that
hath put thee to this pain.  Yet I may not suffer thee to endure the
anguish any more, for thou art my child."

Then Zeus called Pæon the healer, and bade him tend the wound; and he
cured it of its smart.  Then Hebe gave to Ares the bath, and clad him
in fair array, and he sat down by Zeus, rejoicing.


Pæ'-on.  He'-be.




CHAPTER VI

GLAUCUS AND DIOMED

Now when Ares had departed, the Greeks prevailed again, slaying many
of the sons of Troy and of their allies.  But at last Helenus, the
wise seer, spake to Hector and Æneas:--


Glau'-cus.  Hel'-e-nus.


"Cause the army to draw back to the walls, and go through the ranks
and give them such strength and courage as ye may.  And do thou,
Hector, when thou hast so done, pass into the city, and bid thy
mother go with the daughters of Troy, and take the costliest robe
that she hath, and lay it on the knees of Athene in her temple,
vowing therewith to sacrifice twelve heifers, if perchance she may
have pity upon us, and keep this Diomed from our walls.  Surely there
is no Greek so strong as he; we did not fear even Achilles' self so
much as we fear this man to-day, so dreadful is he and fierce.  Go,
and we will make such stand meanwhile as we can."

Then Hector passed through the ranks, bidding them be of good heart,
and so departed to the city.

And when he was gone, Glaucus and Diomed met in the space between the
two hosts.  Then first spake Diomed: "Tell me, thou mighty man of
valour, who thou art of mortal men, for never before have I seen thee
in the battle; but now thou comest out far before the ranks of thy
fellows, and art willing to abide my spear.  If thou be one of the
immortal gods, and hast come down from heaven, I fight thee not.  I
dare not match myself with the gods of heaven."

To him Glaucus made answer: "Valiant son of Tydeus, why seekest thou
to know my name and lineage, and the generations of my fathers?  For
the generations of men are as the leaves of the wood.  The wind
scattereth them on the ground, and the wood bringeth forth others in
the springtime.  So is it with the generations of men--one goeth, and
another cometh.  Yet, if thou wilt know these things, hearken unto
me.  I am the son of Hippolochus, the son of Bellerophon."


Hip-pol'-o-chus.  Bel-ler'-o-phon.


So spake Glaucus, and Diomed was glad at heart.  His spear he drave
into the earth, and he spake pleasant words to the prince: "Verily,
thou art by inheritance a friend of my house.  For long ago great
Œneus entertained Bellerophon in his dwelling, keeping him twenty
days.  Goodly gifts did they give one to the other.  Œneus gave to
Bellerophon a belt richly broidered with purple, and Bellerophon gave
to Œneus a cup of gold with a mouth on either side.  This I left
when I came hither, in my palace at home.  Now Œneus was my
grandfather.  Therefore, I am thy friend and host when thou comest to
the land of Argos, and thou art mine if any chance shall bring me to
Lycia.  But now, let each of us shun the spear of the other, yea, in
the closest press of the battle.  Many sons of Troy there are, and
many of their brave allies, whom I may slay if the gods deliver them
into my hands, so and my feet be swift to overtake them.  And thou
also hast many Greeks to slay if thou canst.  But now let us make
exchange of arms and armour, that both the Greeks and the men of Troy
may know that we are friends by inheritance."


Œ'-neus.  Lyc'-i-a.


So spake Tydeus.  And the two chiefs leapt down from their chariots,
and clasped each the hand of the other, and pledged their faith.
Then Zeus changed the wisdom of Glaucus to folly, so that he gave his
armour in exchange for the armour of Diomed, gold for bronze, the
price of five-score oxen for the price of nine.




CHAPTER VII

HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE

Hector came into the city by the Scæan gates, and as he went wives
and mothers crowded about him, asking how it had fared with their
husbands and sons.  But he said naught, save to bid them pray; and
indeed there was sore news for many, if he had told that which he
knew.  Then he came to the palace of King Priam, and there he saw
Hecuba, his mother, and with her Laodice, fairest of her daughters.
She caught him by the hand and said:--


An-drom'-a-che.  Scæ'-an.  Hec'-u-ba.


"Why hast thou come from the battle, my son?  Do the Greeks press
thee hard, and art thou minded to pray to Father Zeus from the
citadel?  Let me bring thee honey-sweet wine, that thou mayest pour
out before him, aye, and that thou mayest drink thyself, and gladden
thy heart."

But Hector said: "Give me not wine, my mother, lest thou weaken my
knees and make me forget my courage.  Nor must I pour out an offering
to Zeus thus, with unwashed hands.  But do thou gather the mothers of
Troy together, and go to the temple of Athene and take a robe, the
one that is the most precious and beautiful in thy stores, and lay it
on the knees of the goddess, and pray her to keep this dreadful
Diomed from the walls of Troy; and forget not to vow therewith twelve
heifers as a sacrifice.  As for me, I will go and seek Paris, if
perchance he will come with me to the war.  Would that the earth
might open and swallow him up, for of a truth he is a curse to King
Priam and to Troy."

Then went Queen Hecuba into her house, and gave command to her maids
that they should assemble the aged women of the city.  Afterwards she
went to her store-chamber, where lay the well-wrought robes, work of
Sidonian women, which Paris himself brought from Sidon, when he
sailed upon the broad sea, bringing home with him high-born Helen.
The fairest robe of all did the Queen take.  Bright as a star it was,
and it lay the undermost of all.


Si-do'-ni-an.  Si'-don.


And when she and the aged women that were with her came to the temple
of Athene that was in the citadel, the priestess of Athene opened the
doors to them.  They lifted their hands, and cried aloud, and the
priestess laid the garment on the knees of the goddess, and spake,
saying:--

"Lady Athene, that keepest the city, break now the spear of Diomed,
and let him fall upon his face before the Scæan gates.  So will we
sacrifice to thee twelve heifers that have not felt the goad, if only
thou wilt have pity upon our town, and on the wives and little ones
of the men of Troy."

So she prayed, but Athene heeded not her words.

Meanwhile Hector went to the house of Paris, where it stood on the
citadel, near to his own dwelling and the dwelling of Priam.  He
found him busy with his arms, and the fair Helen sat near him and
gave their tasks to her maidens.

When Hector saw his brother, he spake to him bitter words, taunting
him, as if it were by reason of his anger that he stood aloof from
the battle.  "Verily thou doest not well to be angry.  The people
perish about the walls, and the war burns hot round the city; and all
for thy sake.  Rouse thee, lest it be consumed."

And Paris answered: "Brother, thou hast spoken well.  It was not in
wrath that I sat here.  I was vexed at my sore defeat.  But now my
wife has urged me to join the battle; and truly it is well, for
victory comes now to one and now to another.  Wait thou, then, till I
put on my arms, or, if thou wouldst depart, I will overtake thee."

Then spake Helen with soothing words: "O my brother, come in, sit
thee down in this chair, for my heart is weary because of my sin and
of the sin of my husband.  Verily Zeus hath ordained for us an evil
fate, so that our story shall be sung in days that are yet to come."

But Hector said: "Ask me not to rest, for I am eager to help the men
of Troy, for verily their need is sore.  But do thou urge thy husband
that he overtake me while I am yet within the city, for now I go to
my home that I may see my wife and my little son, because I know not
whether I shall return to them again."

So Hector departed and went to his own home, seeking his wife
Andromache, but found her not, for she was on a tower of the wall
with her child and her child's nurse, weeping sore for fear.  And
Hector spake to the maids:--

"Tell me, whither went the white-armed Andromache; to see some
sister-in-law, or to the temple of Athene with the mothers of Troy?"

"Nay," said an aged woman, keeper of the house.  "She went to one of
the towers of the wall, for she had heard that the Greeks were
pressing our people hard.  She hasted as if she were mad, and the
nurse carried the child."

So Hector ran through the city to the Scæan gates, and there
Andromache spied him, and hasted to meet him.  And with her was the
nurse, bearing the young child on her bosom--Hector's only child,
beautiful, headed as a star.  His father called him Scamandrius,
after the river, but the sons of Troy called him Astyanax, the
"City-King," because it was his father who saved the city.  Silently
he smiled when he saw the child, but Andromache clasped his hand and
wept, and said:--


Sca-man'-dri-us.  As-ty'-a-nax.


"O Hector, thy courage will bring thee to death.  Thou hast no pity
on thy wife and child, but sparest not thyself, and all the Greeks
will rush on thee and slay thee.  It were better for me, losing thee,
to die; for I have no comfort but thee.  My father is dead, for
Achilles slew him.  Seven brethren I had, and they all fell in one
day by the hand of the great Achilles.  And my mother, she is dead,
for when she had been ransomed, Artemis smote her with an arrow in
her father's house.  But thou art father to me, and mother, and
brother, and husband also.  Have pity, then, and stay here upon the
wall, lest thou leave me a widow and thy child an orphan.  And set
the people here in array by this fig tree, where the city is easiest
to be taken; for there come the bravest of the Greeks."


Ar'-te-mis.


But Hector said: "Nay, let these things be my care.  I would not that
any son or daughter of Troy should see me skulking from the war.  And
my own heart loathes the thought, and bids me fight in the front.
Well I know, indeed, that Priam, and the people of Priam, and holy
Troy, will perish.  Yet it is not for Troy, or for the people, or
even for my father or my mother that I care so much, as for thee in
the day when some Greek shall carry thee away captive, and thou shalt
ply the loom or carry the pitcher in the land of Greece.  And some
one shall say when he sees thee, 'This was Hector's wife, who was the
bravest of the sons of Troy.'  May the earth cover me before that
day!"

Then Hector stretched out his arms to his child.  But the child drew
back into the bosom of his nurse, with a loud cry, fearing the
shining bronze and the horse-hair plume which nodded awfully from his
helmet top.  Then father and mother laughed aloud.  And Hector took
the helmet from his head, and laid it on the ground, and caught his
child in his hands, and kissed him and dandled him, praying aloud to
Father Zeus and all the gods.

"Grant, Father Zeus and all ye gods, that this child may be as I am,
great among the sons of Troy; and may they say some day, when they
see him carrying home the bloody spoils from the war.  'A better man
than his father, this,' and his mother shall be glad at heart."

Then he gave the child to his mother, and she clasped him to her
breast, and smiled a tearful smile.  And her husband's heart was
moved; and he stroked her with his hand, and spake:--

"Be not troubled over much.  No man shall slay me against the
ordering of fate; but as for fate, that, methinks, no man may escape,
be he coward or brave.  But go, ply thy tasks, the shuttle and the
loom, and give their tasks to thy maidens, and let men take thought
for the battle."

Then Hector took up his helmet from the ground, and Andromache went
her way to her home, oft turning back her eyes.  And when she was
come, she and all her maidens wailed for the living Hector as though
he were dead, for she thought that she should never see him any more
returning safe from the battle.

And as Hector went his way, Paris came running, clad in shining arms,
like to some proud steed which has been fed high in his stall, and
now scours the plain with head aloft and mane streaming over his
shoulders.  And he spake to Hector:--

"I have kept thee, I fear, when thou wast in haste, nor came at thy
bidding."

But Hector answered: "No man can blame thy courage, only thou
wilfully heldest back from the battle.  Therefore do the sons of Troy
speak shame of thee.  But now let us go to the war."

So they went together out of the gates, and fell upon the hosts of
the Greeks and slew many chiefs of fame, and Glaucus the Lycian went
with them.




CHAPTER VIII

THE DUEL OF HECTOR AND AJAX

Now when Athene saw that the Greeks were perishing by the hand of
Hector and his companions, it grieved her sore.  So she came down
from the heights of Olympus to help them.  And Apollo met her and
said:--

"Art thou come, Athene, to help the Greeks whom thou lovest?  Well,
let us stay the battle for this day; hereafter they shall fight till
the doom of Troy be accomplished."

But Athene answered, "How shall we stay it?"

And Apollo said, "We will set on Hector to challenge the bravest of
the Greeks to fight with him, man to man."

So they two put the matter into the mind of Helenus the seer.  Then
Helenus went near to Hector, and spake, saying:--

"Listen to me, for I am thy brother,.  Cause the rest of the sons of
Troy and of the Greeks to sit down, and do thou challenge the bravest
of the Greeks to fight with thee, man to man.  And be sure thou shalt
not fall in the battle, for the will of the immortal gods is so."

Then Hector greatly rejoiced, and passed to the front of the army,
holding his spear by the middle, and kept back the sons of Troy; and
King Agamemnon did likewise with his own people.  Then Hector spake:--

"Hear me, sons of Troy, and ye men of Greece.  The covenant that we
made one with another hath been broken, for Zeus would have it so,
purposing evil to both, till either you shall take our high-walled
city or we shall conquer you by your ships.  But let one of you, who
call yourselves champions of the Greeks, come forth and fight with
me, man to man.  And let it so be that if he vanquish me, he shall
spoil me of my arms, but give my body to my people, that they may
burn it with fire; and if I vanquish him, I will spoil him of his
arms, but give his body to the Greeks, that they may bury him and
raise a great mound above him by the broad salt river of Hellespont.
And so men of after days shall see it, sailing by, and say, 'This is
the tomb of the bravest of the Greeks, whom Hector slew.'  So shall
my name live forever."


Hel'-les-pont.


But all the Greeks kept silence, fearing to meet him in battle, but
ashamed to hold back.  At last Menelaus leapt forward and spake:--

"Surely ye are women and not men.  Is there no man to stand up
against this Hector?  Lo!  I will fight with him my own self."

So he spake in his rage, courting death, for Hector was much stronger
than he.  Then King Agamemnon answered:--

"Nay, but this is folly, my brother.  Seek not in thy anger to fight
with one that is stronger than thou; for even Achilles is loth to
meet Hector.  Sit thou down among thy comrades, and the Greeks will
find some champion who shall fight with him."

And Menelaus hearkened to his brother's words, and sat down.  Then
rose up nine chiefs of fame.  First of all, King Agamemnon, lord of
many nations, and next to him Diomed, son of Tydeus, and Ajax the
Greater, and Ajax the Less, and then Idomeneus, and Meriones, who was
his companion in arms, and Eurypylus, and Thoas, son of Andræmon, and
the wise Ulysses.


Me-ri'-o-nes.  Eu-ryp'-y-lus.  Tho'-as.  An-dræ'-mon.


Then Nestor said, "Let us cast lots to see who shall do battle with
the mighty Hector."

So they threw the lots into the helmet of King Agamemnon,--a lot for
each.  And the people prayed, "Grant, ye gods, that the lot of Ajax
the Greater may leap forth, or the lot of Diomed, or the lot of King
Agamemnon."  Then Nestor shook the lots in the helmet, and the one
which they most wished leapt forth.  For the herald took it through
the ranks and showed it to the chiefs, but none knew it for his own
till he came to where Ajax the Greater stood among his comrades.  But
Ajax had marked it with his mark, and put forth his hand for it, and
claimed it, right glad at heart.  On the ground by his feet he threw
it, and said:--

"Mine is the lot, my friends, and right glad I am, for I think that I
shall prevail over the mighty Hector."

So he armed himself and moved forwards, smiling with grim face.  With
mighty strides he came, brandishing his long-shafted spear.  And all
the Greeks were glad to behold him, but the knees of the Trojans were
loosened with fear, and great Hector's heart beat fast; but he
trembled not, nor gave place, seeing that he had himself called him
to battle.  So Ajax came near, holding before him the great shield,
like a wall.  Seven folds of bull's hide it had, and an eighth of
bronze.  Threateningly he spake:--

"Now shalt thou know, Hector, what manner of men there are yet among
our chiefs, though Achilles the lion-hearted is far away, sitting
idly in his tent, in great wrath with King Agamemnon.  Do thou, then,
begin the battle."

"Speak not to me," said Hector, "as though I were a woman or a child,
knowing nothing of war.  Well I know all the arts of battle, to ply
my shield this way and that, to guide my car through the tumult of
steeds, and to stand fighting hand to hand."

And as he spake he hurled his long-shafted spear, and smote the great
shield.  Through six folds it passed, but in the seventh it was
stayed.  Then Ajax hurled his spear, striking Hector's shield.
Through shield it passed and corselet, and cut the tunic close
against the loin; but Hector shrank away and escaped the doom of
death.  Then, each with a fresh spear, they rushed together like
lions or wild boars of the wood.  First Hector smote the middle of
the shield of Ajax, but pierced it not, for the spear-point was bent
back; then Ajax, with a great bound, drove his spear at Hector's
shield and pierced it, forcing him back, and grazing his neck so that
the black blood welled out.  Yet did not Hector cease from the
combat.  A great stone and rough he caught up from the ground, and
hurled it at the seven-fold shield.  Loud rang the bronze, but the
shield brake not.  Then Ajax took a stone heavier by far, and threw
it with all his might.  It brake the shield of Hector, and bore him
backwards, so that he fell at length with his shield above him.  But
Apollo raised him up.  Then did both draw their swords; but ere they
could join in close battle came the heralds, and held their sceptres
between them, and Idæus, the herald of Troy, spake:--


I-dæ'-us.


"Fight no more, my sons; Zeus loves you both, and ye are both mighty
warriors.  That we all know right well.  But now the night bids you
cease, and it is well to heed its bidding."

Then said Ajax: "It is for Hector to speak, for he called the bravest
of the Greeks to battle.  And as he wills it, so will I."

And Hector said: "O Ajax, the gods have given thee stature and
strength and skill, nor is there any better warrior among the Greeks.
Let us cease then from the battle; we may yet meet again, and the
gods give the victory to me or thee.  But now let us give gifts the
one to the other, so that Trojans and Greeks may say, 'Hector and
Ajax met in fierce fight and parted in friendship.'"

So Hector gave to Ajax a silver-studded sword with the scabbard and
the sword-belt, and Ajax gave to Hector a buckler splendid with
purple.  So they parted.  Right glad were the sons of Troy when they
saw Hector returning safe.  Glad also were the Greeks, as they led
Ajax rejoicing in his victory to King Agamemnon.  Thereupon the King
called the chiefs to banquet together, and bade slay an ox of five
years old, and Ajax he honoured most of all, giving him the best
portions.  And when the feast was ended, Nestor said:--

"It were well that we should cease a while from war and burn the
dead, for many are fallen.  And we will build a great wall and dig a
trench about it, and we will make gates that a chariot may pass
through, so that our ships may be safe, if the sons of Troy should
press us hard."

But the next morning came a herald from Troy to the chiefs, as they
sat in council by the ship of King Agamemnon, and said:--

"This is the word of Priam and the men of Troy: Paris will give back
all the treasures of the fair Helen, and many more besides; but the
fair Helen herself he will not give.  And if this please you not,
grant us a truce, that we may bury our dead."

Then Diomed spake, "Nay, we will not take the treasures, for a man
may know, even though he be a fool, that the doom of Troy is come."

And King Agamemnon said, "Herald, thou hast heard the word of the
Greeks, but as for the truce, be it as you will."

So the next day they burnt their dead, and the Greeks made a wall
with gates and dug a trench about it.  And when it was finished, even
at sunset, they made ready a meal, and lo! there came ships from
Lemnos bringing wine, and Greeks bought thereof, some with bronze,
and some with iron, and some with shields of ox hide.  All night they
feasted right joyously.  The sons of Troy also feasted in their city.
But the dreadful thunder rolled through the night, for Zeus was
planning evil against them.




CHAPTER IX

THE BATTLE ON THE PLAIN

When the next morning came Zeus called the gods to an assembly on the
topmost ridge of Olympus, and spake to them, saying:--

"Hearken, gods and goddesses!  Let none of you presume to go against
my word.  Whosoever of you shall aid either Greek or Trojan, him will
I smite with the thunder, or else will cast him far down to the
darkness of Tartarus, whose gates are iron and whose threshold
bronze, and he shall know that I am chief among gods.  And if ye will
make trial of my strength, let down a chain of gold from heaven to
earth, and take hold thereof, all ye gods and goddesses.  Yet shall
ye not drag down Zeus, no, though ye strive with all your might.  But
if I should draw with all my strength, I could lift you up, and earth
and sea with you, and bind the chain about a horn of Olympus, and
leave you hanging there.  So much am I stronger than all besides."


Tar'-tar-us.


Then all the gods sat silent and amazed.  But at last spake Athene:
"Surely we know, Father Zeus, that thy strength cannot be resisted.
Yet we pity the Greeks, and fear lest they should perish altogether.
We will keep aloof from the war, according to thy command, but we
will give them counsel."

And Zeus smiled upon her, and gave consent.  Then he yoked to his
chariot his swift horses, and touched them with his whip.  Midway
between heaven and earth they flew, and came to Ida, the mountain of
many springs.  There he stayed his course, and sat down amidst the
peaks, looking on the city of Troy and the host of the Greeks.

The Greeks took their meal in haste, and armed themselves.  The men
of Troy also made them ready for battle in the city; fewer they were
in number than their foes, but not less eager for the fight, for
indeed a sore need was upon them, the need to fight for children and
wife.  Then the gates were opened, and the people went quickly forth.

And the two hosts came together, buckler against buckler, and spear
against spear, and the shields clashed with a great ringing sound.
While the day was increasing, neither this side prevailed nor that;
but at noon Father Zeus stretched on high his golden scales, laying
in them two weights of death; one for the Greeks, and one for the
sons of Troy.  By the middle he took the scales, and let them hang,
and the scale of the Greeks sank lower.  Then did he send his blazing
thunderbolt among the people from the heights of Ida, and they saw it
and were dismayed.

Then could no man hold his ground.  Only Nestor remained, against his
will, for Paris had slain one of his chariot-horses with an arrow.
And while the old man cut away the traces, Hector came through the
press.  Then would the old man have perished, but Diomed was swift to
notice his danger.  With a great cry he called Ulysses, and said:--

"Son of Laertes, whither dost thou flee, turning thy back like a
coward?  See that no man thrust thee in the back with a spear.
Tarry, and keep back this fierce man of war from old Nestor."

So he spake, but Ulysses heeded not, fleeing fast to the ships.

Then rushed Diomed, alone as he was, into the foremost rank, and
stood before the chariot of old Nestor, and spake: "Old sir, the
younger fighters press thee sore; feeble thou art, and weak thy
charioteer, and thy horses slow.  Come, mount upon my chariot, and
see what the horses that I took from Æneas can do--how they can flee,
and follow, and speed this way and that!  Thy charioteer and mine
shall look to thy horses.  Come thou with me, and Hector shall see
whether there is yet any strength in the spear of Diomed."

To this Nestor gave consent, and took the reins in his hand, and
plied the whip.  Soon they came near to Hector, and Diomed cast his
spear.  Hector he missed, but smote his charioteer upon the breast,
so that he fell from the chariot, and the swift horses started back.
Hector's heart was dark with grief for his comrade; yet he let him
lie where he fell, for he must needs find another charioteer.

Then there would have been rout among the men of Troy, and they would
have been pent up in the city, as sheep in a fold, but that Zeus
hurled a blazing thunderbolt.  Right before the chariot of Diomed did
it fall; and the horses crouched in fear, and Nestor let fall the
reins from his hands, for he was sore afraid, and cried aloud:--

"Son of Tydeus, turn thy horses to flight; seest thou that Zeus is
not with thee?  To-day he giveth glory to Hector; to-morrow, perhaps,
to thee.  The purpose of Zeus none may hinder."

Then the son of Tydeus spake: "Old sir, thou sayest well; but this
goeth to my heart, that Hector will say, 'Diomed fled before me,
seeking the ships.'  Then may the earth swallow me up!"

But Nestor made reply, "Though Hector call thee coward, yet will not
the sons of Troy believe him, nor the daughters whose gallant
husbands thou hast tumbled in the dust."

Then he turned his horses, and fled.  But Hector cried after Diomed:
"Art thou the man to whom the Greeks give high place in the feast,
and plenteous cups of wine?  Not so will they honour thee hereafter.
Run, girl! run, coward!  Shalt thou climb our walls, and carry away
our daughters in thy ships?"

Then Diomed was very wroth, doubting whether to flee or to turn; but
when he turned Zeus thundered from on high, making him afraid.  And
Hector bade the hosts of Troy be of good courage, for that Zeus was
with them, and called to his horses: "Come, now, Bayard, and
Whitefoot, and Flame of Fire, and Brilliant; forget not how the fair
Andromache has cared for you; aye, even before me, who am her
husband.  Carry me fast, that I may win old Nestor's shield, which
men say is all of gold, and strip from the shoulders of Diomed the
breastplate which Hephæstus wrought."

So the Greeks fled headlong within the wall which they had built,
Hector driving them before him, and all the space between the wall
and the ships was crowded with chariots and with men.  Then would
Hector have burned the ships, had not Hera put it in the heart of
King Agamemnon to urge the Greeks to battle.  On the ship of Ulysses,
that was midmost of all, he stood, so that he could shout to either
end, to where Ajax the Greater on one side, and Achilles on the
other, had drawn up their ships.  And he cried aloud:--

"Shame on you, ye Greeks!  Where are now your boasts that one man of
you would outmatch five score, yea, ten score, of the sons of Troy?
And now one single man is of more worth than you all!  O Father Zeus,
grant us that we may at least escape with our lives."

And Zeus hearkened to his prayer, and sent a sign from heaven, an
eagle that held a kid in his claw; by the altar of Zeus did he drop
it, and the Greeks, when they saw it, took heart, and leaped upon the
men of Troy, and rejoiced again in the battle.

Foremost of all was Diomed.  After him came the sons of Atreus, and
either Ajax, and all the chiefs, and among them Teucer, who stood
beneath the shield of Ajax son of Telamon, as he bent his bow.  Ajax
would lift his shield a little, and Teucer, peering out, would shoot
a warrior in the throng.  Then would he go back as a child to his
mother, and Ajax would hide him beneath his shield.  Eight warriors
did he slay; and when Agamemnon saw him, he came near, and spake,
saying: "Shoot on, Teucer, and be a light to thy people and to thy
father Telamon.  Surely when Zeus and Athene shall grant me the spoil
of Troy, to thee, first after myself, will I give a goodly gift."


Teu'-cer.  Tel'-a-mon.


Teucer made reply: "Eight shafts have I launched, and every shaft has
been buried in a warrior's flesh; but that man I cannot strike."

He spake, and sped another arrow from the string, aiming at Hector.
Him he touched not, but he slew a son of Priam.  Yet once again he
shot, and slew this time the charioteer of Hector, striking him full
upon the breast, as he rushed into battle.  Then Hector's heart grew
dark with rage and grief.  He leapt from his chariot to the ground,
and caught a stone in his hand, and went towards Teucer, desiring to
crush him.  Then Teucer took an arrow from the quiver and fitted it
on the string, but as he drew the arrow to his shoulder, Hector smote
him where the collarbone stands between neck and breast, and snapped
the bow-string, and numbed his arm and wrist, so that the bow flew
from his hand, and he fell upon his knee.  But Ajax bestrode him,
covering him with his shield, and two of his comrades bare him,
groaning deeply, to the ships.

Then again did Zeus put courage into the hearts of the men of Troy,
and they thrust the Greeks back to the ditch; and Hector moved ever
in the front, rejoicing in his strength.  Even as a dog pursues a
wild boar or a lion, and catches him by hip or thigh, so did Hector
hang upon the Greeks, and smite the hindmost as they fled.

But Hera saw and pitied them, and spake to Athene: "Shall not thou
and I have pity on the Greeks once more?  They are perishing at the
hands of Hector."

Athene made reply: "It is all the doing of my father, who listened to
Thetis, when she besought him to give honour to Achilles.  But
another day, may be, he will hearken unto me.  Make ready, therefore,
the horses, while I arm myself for the war.  We will see whether
Hector will be glad when he beholds thee and me in the forefront of
the battle."

So Hera made ready the chariot, and Athene armed herself for the war.
And when she was armed, Hera lashed the horses, and the great gates
of heaven, where the Hours keep watch, opened before them.

But Zeus saw them from Ida, and said to Iris of the golden wings: "Go
now, swift Iris, bid these two not come face to face with me, for our
meeting would be ill for them.  Verily I will cast them from their
chariot, and break the chariot in pieces.  Not for ten years would
they recover of their wounds should the lightning smite them."

So Iris hasted on her way, and gave the two goddesses the Father's
message.

Then spake Hera to Athene: "No more shall we two do battle with Zeus
for the sake of mortal men.  Let them perish or live, as it may
chance."

So they two went back to Olympus, and sat down in their chairs of
gold, among the other gods, right heavy of heart.

Zeus also hastened from Ida to Olympus, and came into the assembly of
the gods; but Hera and Athene sat apart, and spake not, and asked no
question.

Then said Zeus: "Why are ye so cast down?  To-morrow shall see worse
things than these; for great Hector will not cease from his slaying
till the son of Peleus be roused by his ships, in the day when they
shall fight about the dead Patroclus."


Pe'-leus.


And row the sun sank into the sea; wroth were the Trojans that the
light should go, but to the Greeks welcome came the night.

Then Hector called the men of Troy to an assembly.  In his hand he
held a spear eleven cubits long, with flaming point of bronze, and
circled with gold; on it he leant and spake:--


cubit, a foot and a half.


"Give ear, ye Trojans and allies!  I thought this day to destroy the
hosts of the Greeks and their ships, and so to return to Troy; but
night hath hindered me.  Let us yield to night, and take our meal.
Unharness your horses and feed them.  Fetch also from the city kine,
and sheep, and wine, and bread, and store of fuel also, that we may
burn many fires, lest the Greeks escape across the sea in the night.
Also let the heralds make proclamation in the city that the lads and
the old men should guard the wall, and that every woman should light
a great fire in her house, and that all should keep watch, lest an
ambush should enter the city while the people are away.  In the
morning will we arm ourselves, and wake the war beside the ships, and
bring ruin on the Greeks."

So Hector spake, and all the Trojans shouted their assent.  They
loosed their horses, and fetched food from the city, and gathered
fuel.  All night long they sat in high hope.  And as on some windless
night the stars shine bright about the moon, and all the crags and
dells are shown, and the tops of the hills also, and the depths of
the sky are open, and all the stars appear, and the shepherd's heart
is glad; so the Trojan fires glittered between the stream of Xanthus
and the ships.  A thousand fires were burning, and fifty sat in the
glare of each; and the horses stood beside the chariots champing
their grain, and waited for the morn.


Xan'-thus (X is pronounced as Z).




CHAPTER X

THE EMBASSY TO ACHILLES

While the Trojans watched with good hope, the Greeks were filled with
fear.  And King Agamemnon was troubled beyond all others.  He bade
the heralds call every man to the assembly.  Gloomily they sat, and
when the King rose up to speak, his tears dropped down, as the waters
drop down a steep cliff-side from some spring which the sunshine
toucheth not.  Thus he spake: "O friends, lords and leaders of the
Greeks, verily Zeus dealeth ill with me.  Once he promised that I
should take the city of Troy and so return home; but now he hath
deceived me, bidding me go back dishonoured, having lost much people.
Therefore let us flee with our ships to the land of our fathers, for
Troy we may not take."

Long time the chiefs kept silence, for they were out of heart; but at
the last rose Diomed, and spake: "Be not wroth, O King, if I contend
with this thy madness.  Thou hast called me laggard and coward;
whether I be so indeed the Greeks know well, both young and old.  But
to thee Zeus hath given lordship and the power of the sceptre above
thy fellows; but courage he hath not given, and courage is best of
all.  Now if thine heart be bent upon return, go thou; the way is
nigh, and thy ships are by the sea; but all the other Greeks will
abide till they have taken Troy.  Yea, and if these also will go,
then we two, I and Sthenelus, will abide and fight till we make an
end of the city, for it was the gods that sent us hither."

Then Nestor spake: "Thou art brave in war, son of Tydeus, and
excellent in council above thy fellows.  But now let us take our
meal; and let sentinels watch along the trench.  And do thou, son of
Atreus, make a feast for thy chiefs, as is meet.  And him who
counsels thee most wisely thou must follow.  Sorely do we need wise
counsel, seeing that the enemy have so many fires near our ships.
Verily this night will save our army or destroy."

So King Agamemnon called the chiefs to a feast; and when the feast
was ended Nestor rose up and spake: "Evil was the day, O King, when
thou didst send and take the damsel Briseis from the tent of
Achilles.  Let us therefore take thought how we may best appease him
with noble gifts and pleasant words."

Then said King Agamemnon: "These are true words that thou hast
spoken, old man.  Truly I did as a fool that day, and I deny it not.
For he that is loved of Zeus is of more worth than whole armies of
men; and verily Zeus loveth this man, seeing that he putteth the
Greeks to flight that he may do him honour.  But even as I wronged
him in my folly, so will I make amends, and give a recompense beyond
all telling.  And now I will declare before you all the gifts that I
will give: a huge treasure of gold and bronze, and twelve stout
horses, that have won prizes in the race by fleetness of foot.  And
seven women will I give him, skilled in excellent handiwork, fairer
than all women.  These will I give him, and with them the damsel
Briseis, even as I took her from him.  And if the gods shall grant us
to destroy the great city of Priam, then let him come when we divide
the spoil, and choose for himself twenty women of Troy, the fairest
there be after Helen.  And if he come again to the land of Greece,
then shall he be my son, and he shall choose in marriage which one of
my daughters he will.  Yea, and I will give with her seven fair
cities, with pasture-lands and vineyards, wherein dwell men that have
many flocks and herds, who will honour him with gifts even as men
honour a god, and will fulfil his commands.  All this will I give
him, if so be that he will cease from his anger."

To him Nestor made answer: "No man may think lightly of the gifts
that thou givest to great Achilles.  Come, therefore, let us choose
men, that they may go with all speed to his tent.  Let Phœnix, who
is beloved of Zeus, lead the way; and let Ajax the Greater and
Ulysses go with him, and two heralds also."


Phœ'-nix.


So the heralds went by the shore of the sea; and, as they went, they
made prayer to the god that shakes the earth that they might turn the
heart of Achilles.  And when they came to the ships of the Myrmidons,
they found the King taking his pleasure with a harp.  There he sat,
delighting his soul with music, and sang the deeds of heroes of old
time.  And Patroclus sat opposite him in silence, waiting till he
should cease from his singing.  Then the two chiefs came forward,
Ulysses leading the way, and stood before the face of Achilles; and
Achilles leapt up in much amaze, holding the harp in his hand.  And
Patroclus rose also from his seat when he saw the twain.  Then said
Achilles, fleet of foot, "Welcome ye are, and right dear to me, for
all my anger."

So spake Achilles, and led them forward; and he bade them sit on
seats that were covered with coverlets of purple.  Then said he to
Patroclus, "Bring forth the biggest bowl, and mix for each man a cup,
for I have not dearer friends than these that are come beneath my
roof this day.

And the chiefs stretched forth their hands to the meat that lay ready
before them.  And when they had done with the desire for food and
drink, Ajax nodded to Phœnix that he should speak; but Ulysses
perceived it, and was beforehand with him, and filled a cup with
wine, and pledged Achilles, and spake: "Hail, Achilles!  No lack have
we had of feasting before in the tent of King Agamemnon and now in
thine; but it is not of feasting that we think this day; for we
behold sore destruction close at hand, and are afraid.  Verily, we
are in doubt whether or no we may save our ships, unless thou wilt
gird on thy might again.  For indeed this day the men of Troy and
their allies come near to the ships to burn them with fire.  And Zeus
shows them favourable signs.  As for Hector, he rages furiously,
trusting in Zeus, and vows that he will burn the ships with fire, and
make havoc of the Greeks while they are dazed with the smoke of the
burning.  Sorely do I fear in my heart lest the god fulfil his
threats, and doom us to perish here in Troy, far from the plains of
Argos.  Up, therefore, if thou art minded even now to save the
Greeks!  Delay not, lest thou repent hereafter, for there is no
remedy for that which is done.  Cease from thy anger.  Verily,
Agamemnon offereth thee worldly gifts, a huge treasure of gold and
bronze, and twelve stout horses that have won much wealth for
Agamemnon by fleetness of foot, and seven women, skilful in
handiwork, and fairer than all their kind; and Briseis herself he
will restore to thee, even as he took her from thee.  All these
things will he give; and if we take the great city of Priam, twenty
daughters of Troy, fairest of women, after Helen.  And when we shall
go back to Greece, thou shalt have his daughter to wife, her whom
thou shalt choose, and with her seven cities, lying all of them near
to the sea, a land of vineyards and cornfields, whose folk shall pay
thee tribute and honour.  But if thou yet hate from thy heart
Agamemnon and his gifts, then I pray thee have pity upon the Greeks,
who will honour thee even as men honour a god.  Hector, too, thou
mayest slay, for he will come near thee in his madness, for he deems
that there is not a man of all the Greeks that can stand against him."

To him Achilles, fleet of foot, made answer: "Son of Laertes, plain
shall be my speech; for I would not have you sit before me, seeking
to coax me, one man this way and another another.  Why must the
Greeks make war against the sons of Troy?  Why did the sons of Atreus
gather this host together, and lead them to this land?  Was it not
for fair-haired Helen's sake?  Tell me, then, do the sons of Atreus
alone of all men love their wives?  Nay, but whosoever is good and
sound of heart loveth his wife and cherisheth her, even as I loved
mine, though I won her by my spear.  He took her from me, and
deceived me; let him not make trial of me again, for I know him well,
and he shall not prevail with me.  Let him take counsel now with
thee, Ulysses, and with the other princes of the host, how he may
keep from the ships the devouring fire.  Many things hath he done
without my help, building a wall and digging a ditch about it, both
wide and deep, and setting stakes in the ditch; yet for all this can
he not keep Hector from the ships.  And yet, when I fought in the
host of the Greeks, this Hector dared not set his army in array far
from the walls, but scarce came to the Scæan gates and the fig tree.
Once did he await me there to do battle, man against man, and scarce
escaped my spear.  But now, seeing that I have no mind to fight with
him, I will do sacrifice to-morrow to Zeus and all the gods, and I
will store my ships and launch them on the sea.  Yea, to-morrow,
right early in the morning, thou shalt see them, if thou wilt,
sailing along the Hellespont, and my men toiling eagerly at the oar;
and if the god that shaketh the earth grants me a fair journey, on
the third morning shall I come to the fair land of Phthia.  There is
all the wealth that I left behind me when I came to Troy; and hence I
shall carry with me yet more of gold and bronze and iron, and fair
women slaves, my portion of the spoil.  King Agamemnon shall not
deceive me again with lying speech.  And as for his gifts, I scorn
them; though he give me tenfold, yea, twentyfold, all that he now
hath promised.  Yea, verily, though he give me gifts as the sand of
the sea for multitude, he shall not persuade me, till he shall have
endured bitterness of soul like mine.  And his daughter I will not
wed--no, not though she be as fair as golden Aphrodite, and match
Athene of the flashing eyes in skill of handiwork.  Let him choose
him from among the Greeks some kinglier son-in-law than I, and for
me, if the gods bring me safe to my home, Peleus shall choose a wife.
For all the wealth that was stored in the city of Troy, in the days
of peace, before the Greeks came thither, and all the treasure that
is laid up in the temple of Apollo the Archer that is in the city of
Delphi--all this I count as nothing in comparison with life.  For a
man may take cattle and sheep for spoil, and he may buy treasure and
horses; but the life of a man, when it hath once passed from out his
lips, he may not win back by spoiling or by buying.  And to me my
mother, even Thetis, the goddess of the silver foot, hath unfolded my
doom.  A double doom it is.  If I abide in this land and fight
against the city of Troy, then shall I return no more to my native
country, but my name shall live for ever; but if I go back to my
home, then my fame shall be taken from me, but I shall live long and
see not the grave.  Therefore I go, and verily I counsel you all to
go, for Troy ye never shall take as ye desire, seeing that Zeus, who
seeth all things before, holdeth over it his hand, and her sons are a
valiant folk.  And now go your way; carry back this answer to the
princes of the Greeks.  But let the old man Phœnix abide with me
in my tent to-night, that he may sail in my ship on the morrow.
Verily he shall sail, if he will; but I will not take him by force."


Phthi'-a.  Pe'-leus.


Thus spake Achilles.  And the chiefs sat still and held their peace,
marvelling at his speech, so vehement was he.  But at the last the
old man Phœnix made answer.  With many tears he spake, for he was
sore afraid lest the ships of the Greeks should perish: "If indeed
thou art minded to depart, and carest not to save the ships from
devouring fire, how can I endure to be left alone by thee?  For the
old man Peleus made me thy teacher, both of words and of deeds.  With
no man but me wouldst thou go unto the feast, or take thy meat in the
hall; but I set thee upon my knees, and cut the savoury morsel for
thee from the dish, and put the wine-cup to thy lips.  Many a tunic
hast thou stained for me, sputtering forth the wine upon it.  Much
have I suffered, and much toiled for thee; for child of mine own I
had not, and thou wast to me as a son, Achilles, to cherish me in my
need."

Then Achilles nodded to Patroclus, that he should spread a couch for
the old man Phœnix, that so the other twain might depart without
delay.  Then said Ajax, the son of Telamon: "Let us depart, Ulysses.
I trow that we shall accomplish naught this day.  Let us, therefore,
take back the tidings, evil though they be, to them that wait for us."

Then said Achilles: "My heart swells with wrath, when I remember how
the son of Atreus shamed me before all the people, as though I was
some stranger nothing worth.  Go and take my message.  I will not
arise to the battle till Hector shall come as he slays the Greeks
even to the tents of the Myrmidons, and shall encircle their ships
with fire.  But when he shall come to my tent and to my ships, then I
ween shall he be stayed, for all that he is eager for battle."

Then Ajax and Ulysses departed, and told the message of Achilles to
King Agamemnon.




CHAPTER XI

THE ADVENTURE OF ULYSSES AND DIOMED

The other chiefs of the Greeks slept that night; but King Agamemnon
slept not; sore troubled was he in heart.  For when he looked towards
Troy, and saw the many fires, and heard the sound of flute and pipe
and the murmur of men, he was astonished; and when he looked towards
the ships he groaned, and tore his hair, thinking what evil might
come to the people.  Then it seemed good to him to seek counsel from
Nestor.  So he arose, and drew his coat about his breast, and bound
the sandals on his feet, and wrapped a tawny lion's hide about him,
and took a spear in his hand.

To Menelaus also came no sleep that night.  So he arose, and wrapped
a leopard's skin about him, and put on his head a cap of bronze, and
took a spear in his hand, and went to seek his brother.

He found him arming by his ship, and said; "Why armest thou?  Wilt
thou send some one to spy out the doings of the Trojans?  I fear much
that no man will undertake the task to go alone, for it is a daring
deed."

To him replied King Agamemnon: "We have need of good counsel, my
brother, that we may save the people.  Truly the mind of Zeus is
changed; for never hath a man wrought such destruction in one day as
did Hector on the Greeks.  Run thou to Ajax and Idomeneus, and call
them to the council, and I will go to Nestor."

So the chiefs were gathered to the council.  First of all they went
to the company of them that watched the camp.  These they found not
sleeping but awake.  As dogs that hear the sound of some wild beast
in the wood, so did the watch look towards the plain, thinking to
hear the sound of the feet of the Trojans.

Gladly did old Nestor see them, and spake, saying, "Such be your
watch, my children, lest we become a prey to our enemies."

Then he hasted to cross the trench, and with him went the other
princes.  In an open spaces that was clear of dead, they sat down,
even where Hector had turned back from slaying the Greeks.

And Nestor rose and said: "Is there now a man who will go among the
sons of Troy, and see what they are minded to do?  Great honour will
he win, and gifts."

Then Diomed said, "I am ready to go, but I would fain have some one
with me.  To have a companion gives comfort and courage, and, indeed,
two wits are better than one to take counsel and to foresee."

And many were willing to go with Diomed.  But Agamemnon said, "Choose
the best man, O Diomed, and regard not the birth or rank of any."
And Diomed answered: "If I may choose, whom should I choose rather
than the wise Ulysses?  Brave is he, and prudent, and Athene loves
him well."

But Ulysses said: "Praise me not overmuch, nor blame me.  Only let us
go, for the night is far spent."

So these two armed themselves.  Diomed took a two-edged sword and a
shield, and a helmet without a crest, and Ulysses a bow and a quiver
and a sword, and a helmet of hide with the white teeth of a wild boar
about it.  Then both prayed to Athene that she would help them, and
after that they went through the darkness like two lions, trampling
over dead bodies and arms and blood.

But Hector, meanwhile, was thinking on the same things, for he called
the chiefs to a council and said: "Who now will go and spy among the
Greeks, and see what they purpose to do on the morrow, and whether
they are keeping watch through the night?  A goodly reward shall he
have, even a chariot and horses, the best that there are in the camp
of the Greeks."

Then stood up a certain Dolon.  Ill-favoured was he, but a swift
runner.  He said:--


Do'-lon.


"I will go, Hector; but come, lift up thy sceptre, and swear to me
that thou wilt give me the chariot and the horses of Achilles."

So Hector sware to him.  And Dolon took his bow, and a helmet of gray
wolf-skin, and a sharp spear, and went his way in haste.  But Ulysses
saw him, and said:--

"Here cometh a man, Diomed, but whether he be a spy or a spoiler of
the dead I know not.  Let him pass by a space that we may take him.
If he outrun us, press him with thy spear towards the ships; only let
him not turn back to the city."

So they lay down among the dead, a little out of the way, and Dolon
passed by them unknowing; but when he had gone a little space they
ran upon him.  For a while he stood hearkening to their steps, for he
thought that Hector had sent comrades to call him back.  But when
they were a spear's throw from him, or less, he knew them for foes
and fled.  And as two dogs follow a fawn or a hare, so they ran,
pursuing Dolon.  And when he had well-nigh reached the trench, for
they kept him from turning back to the city, Diomed rushed forward
and cried:--

"Stay, or I will slay thee with my spear."

And he threw the spear, but made it pass over his shoulder, so that
it stood in the ground before him.  Then Dolon stood trembling and
pale, and with teeth chattering with fear.  And the two heroes,
breathing hard, came up and laid hands on him.  And he said,
weeping:--

"Hold me for ransom; much gold and bronze and iron will my father
give, if he hear that I am a prisoner at the ships."

Then said the wise Ulysses: "Tell us truly, why wast thou coming
hither through the darkness?  To spoil the dead, or, at Hector's
bidding, to spy out our affairs at the ships, or on some errand of
thine own?"

And Dolon answered, "Hector persuaded me, promising to give me the
horses and chariot of Achilles, and he bade me go and spy out what ye
purposed to do on the morrow, and whether ye were keeping watch in
the night."

And Ulysses smiled and said: "Surely it was a great reward that thy
soul desired.  But tell me, where is Hector, and where are the
watches of the sons of Troy?"

Then Dolon answered: "Hector holds council with the chiefs.  As for
the army, there are no watches set, save only where be the Trojans
themselves.  As for the allies, they sleep secure, and trust to the
Trojans to watch for them, seeing that they have not wives or
children near."

Then Ulysses asked, "Do they sleep, then, among the Trojans, or
apart?"

"Next to the sea," said Dolon, "but if ye wish to enter the camp, lo!
apart from all are some newcomers, Thracians, with Rhesus, their
king.  Never have I seen horses so fair and tall as his.  Whiter are
they than snow, and swifter than the winds.  But do ye now send me to
the ships, or, if ye will, bind me and leave me here."


Thra'-ci-ans.  Rhe'-sus.


But Diomed said: "Think not to escape, Dolon, though thy news is
good; for then wouldst thou come again to spy out our camp or to
fight.  But if I slay thee, thou wilt trouble the Greeks no more."

So he slew him, and took from him his arms, hanging them on a
tamarisk tree, and made a mark with reeds and tamarisk boughs, that
they might know the place as they came back.  So they went on across
the plain and came to where the men of Thrace lay sleeping, and by
each man were his arms in fair array, and his horses; but in the
midst lay King Rhesus, with his horses tethered to the chariot-rail.
Then Diomed began to slay.  As a lion rushes on a flock, so rushed he
on the men of Thrace.  Twelve he slew, and as he slew them Ulysses
dragged them out of the way, that there might be a clear road for the
horses, lest they should start back, fearing the dead bodies, for
they were not used to war.  And the thirteenth was King Rhesus
himself, who panted in his sleep, for an evil dream was on him.  And
meanwhile Ulysses drove the horses out of the encampment, smiting
them with his bow, for he had not thought to take the whip out of the
chariot.  Then he whistled, making a sign to Diomed that he should
come, for Diomed lingered, doubting whether he might not slay yet
more.  But Athene whispered in his ear:--

"Think of thy return, lest some god rouse the Trojans against thee."

Indeed, Apollo was even then rousing them.  And the Trojans flocked
together with tumult and shouting.  But Diomed and Ulysses meanwhile
had mounted the horses, and were riding to the ships.  Glad were
their comrades to see them safe returned, and praised them much for
all that they had done.




CHAPTER XII

THE WOUNDING OF THE CHIEFS

When the next day dawned, King Agamemnon called the Greeks to battle.
And on the other side Hector set in order the men of Troy.  As a
baleful star now shineth from the clouds, and now is hidden, so
Hector now shone among the foremost ranks, and now ordered the
rearward.

Then the men of Troy and the Greeks leapt upon each other.  As
reapers reap in a rich man's field, making the barley and the wheat
fall in long swathes, so did the Trojans and the Greeks slay one
another.  So long as the day was waxing, the battle was equal, and
the people fell alike on either side; but at noon, the Greeks brake
the Trojan line, and Agamemnon leapt first into the breach.  As a
fire falleth on a wood, and sweepeth it away, so Agamemnon fell upon
the men of Troy, and swept them before him.  Past the Tomb of Ilus,
and past the wild fig tree in the plain, they fled, and the King
followed hard upon them, shouting aloud.  But when they came to the
Scæan gate they turned and stood, and the battle was renewed.


I'-lus.


Then spake Zeus to Iris, saying: "Get thee away, swift Iris, and bear
this word to Hector.  So long as he shall see King Agamemnon laying
waste the ranks of men, so long let him hold back from the battle.
But when the King shall be wounded with spear or arrow, and shall
leap from his chariot, then let him advance, and I will give him
strength to slay till he shall come to the ships, and the sun shall
set."

So he came, and told these words to Hector.  And when Hector heard
them, he leapt from his chariot, and went up and down the ranks of
Troy, strengthening them for the fight.  And the two hosts stood, and
faced each other.

Then did King Agamemnon slay the two sons of Antenor.  First he slew
Iphidamas, smiting him a deadly blow upon the neck.  But Coön,
Antenor's first-born son, was grieved for his brother, and standing
sideways, so that the King saw him not, he stabbed him in the middle
of the arm, beneath the elbow, and the spear pierced it through.  The
King started, yet ceased not from battle, and as Coön dragged his
brother by the foot out of the press, calling upon the chiefs to
help, then Agamemnon smote him with the spear, beneath the shield,
and drove him to the ground, and then smote off his head with the
sword.  Thus did Agamemnon slay the two sons of Antenor.


I-phid'-a-mas.  Co'-on.


For a time, while the wound was warm, the King fought as before; but
when it grew cold and stiff, great pain came upon him, and he leapt
into his chariot and bade the charioteer drive him to the ships, for
he could fight no more.

Now when Hector saw that Agamemnon, had departed from the battle, he
called aloud to the Trojans and the allies: "Come on, and play the
man.  The leader of the Greeks is gone; and Zeus giveth the honour
unto me."

So he stirred the spirit within them.  As a hunter setteth his dogs
on a wild boar or a lion in the field, so did Hector set the men of
Troy upon the Greeks, and he himself went among the foremost, and
plunged into the battle as a storm cometh down upon the sea.  Many
valiant men did he slay, till Ulysses called to Diomed: "Son of
Tydeus, have we forgotten our courage?  Come hither, and stand by me;
it were shame if Hector should take our ships."

Strong Diomed made answer, "I will, indeed, abide with thee; but it
will fare ill with us if Zeus give the mastery to the men of Troy
rather than to us."

So he spake, and slew a man, and Ulysses another; and afterwards they
slew two apiece, making head against the men of Troy, and the Greeks,
as they fled from Hector, gladly took breath and turned again.

Hector was quick to see what they did, and he came upon them with a
cry, and the companies of Troy followed after him.  But when Diomed
saw him, he was afraid, and said to Ulysses, "See, mighty Hector
cometh against us; let us be firm and stand against him."

And even as he spake he cast his spear, nor missed his aim.  On the
helmet he smote Hector; but the spear glanced from the bronze, nor
wounded the flesh; for the helmet which Apollo had given him saved
him.  But he staggered under the blow, falling on his knee, and
darkness came over his eyes.  And when Diomed came after his spear,
far through the foremost ranks, to where it had lighted on the
ground, then Hector, breathing again, leapt upon his car, and drove
into the midst of the host, avoiding death.

Then Diomed, as he rushed on, with his spear in his hand, cried
aloud: "Dog, thou hast escaped from death once more; but mischief
came near thee.  Apollo hath saved thee, to whom doubtless thou didst
pray ere thou came into the press of war.  But some time I will slay
thee, if only some god will help."

And he turned to slay the men of Troy.  But Paris, who was in hiding
behind the pillar on the Tomb of Ilus, drew his bow, and smote him
with an arrow through the ankle of the right foot.  Loud he boasted
of his aim.  "Only," he said, "I would that I had pierced thee in the
loin; then hadst thou troubled the sons of Troy no more."

But Diomed answered: "Small good were thy bow to thee, cowardly
archer, if thou shouldst dare to meet me face to face.  And as for
this graze on my foot, I care no more than if a woman or child had
smitten me.  Not such the wounds I deal."

Then Ulysses stood before him, while he drew the arrow out of his
foot.  Grievous was the smart of the wound, for all his brave words.
Therefore he leapt into his chariot, and bade drive in haste to the
ships; and Ulysses stood alone, and none of the Greeks stood by him,
for all were sore afraid.  Then spake he to himself:--

"What shall I do?  It were much evil to fly before these many foes,
and yet worse were I to be caught and slain, for truly Zeus hath sent
great fear upon the Greeks.  But why talk I thus?  'Tis only the
coward that draweth back from the war; the brave man standeth whether
he smite or be smitten."

And as he spake, the Trojans came about him as men with dogs come
about a wild boar who stands at bay, gnashing his white teeth.
Fiercely Ulysses stood at bay, and slew five chiefs of fame.  But one
of them, before he fell, wounded him on the side, scraping the flesh
from the ribs.  High spurted the blood from the wound, and the
Trojans shouted to see it.  Then Ulysses cried aloud for help; three
times he cried, and Menelaus heard him, and called to Ajax, saying:--

"O Ajax, I hear the voice of Ulysses; and he shouteth as if the men
of Troy had compassed him about, and he was left alone.  Come,
therefore, let us help him, lest he come to harm, and the Greeks have
a heavy loss!"

Thus he spake, and led the way, and Ajax followed him; and when they
came to Ulysses, the Trojans had beset him, even as the jackals beset
a long-horned hart among the hills, which a hunter hath wounded with
an arrow from the bow.  From the hunter he flieth, while the wound is
warm, but when he groweth weak the jackals tear him.  Then cometh a
lion, and the jackals flee.  So fled the Trojans when Ajax came and
stood beside Ulysses.  Then Menelaus took Ulysses by the hand, and
led him from out the throng.

Then Ajax leapt upon the Trojans and slew many, scouring the plain,
and killing horse and man.  But Paris, husband of Helen, stayed
Machaon from the fight, wounding him on the right shoulder with a
three-pointed arrow.  Therefore spake Idomeneus to Nestor, "Quick,
Nestor, mount thy chariot and take Machaon with thee, and drive
quickly to the ships, for the life of a physician is as the lives of
many men!"

So Nestor mounted on his chariot, and Machaon stood beside him.  He
touched the horses, and they flew right willingly to the ships.

Now Achilles was standing on the stern of his ship, looking at the
war, and he saw Nestor carrying Machaon in his chariot to the ships.
Then he called to Patroclus, and Patroclus, who was in the tent, came
forth.  Then said Achilles:--

"Now will the Greeks soon come praying for help, for their need is
sore.  But go and see who is this whom Nestor is taking to the ships.
His shoulders are the shoulders of Machaon, but I saw not his face,
so swift the horses passed me by."

Then Patroclus ran to the tent of Nestor, and stood in the door.  But
when old Nestor saw him, he went and took him by the hand, and would
have had him sit down.  But Patroclus would not, saying:--

"Stay me not.  I came but to see who is this that thou hast brought
wounded from the battle.  And now I see that it is Machaon.
Therefore I will return; for thou knowest what manner of man is
Achilles, that he is hasty and swift to blame."

Then said Nestor: "But what careth Achilles for the Greeks? or why
doth he ask who are wounded?  Hear what I say.  It may be that
Achilles will not go forth to the battle.  But let him send thee
forth, and the Myrmidons with thee, and let him put his arms upon
thee, so that the sons of Troy be affrighted, thinking that he is in
the battle, and we shall have breathing space."

Then Patroclus returned to Achilles.




CHAPTER XIII

THE BATTLE AT THE WALL

Now by this time the Trojans were close upon the trench.  But the
horses stood on the brink, fearing to leap it, for it was broad and
deep, and the Greeks had put great stakes therein.  Thus said
Polydamas.


Po-lyd'-a-mas.


"Surely, Hector, this is madness that we strive to cross the trench
in our chariots, for it is broad and deep, and there are great stakes
therein.  Look, too, at this: even if we should be able to cross it,
how will the matter stand?  If, indeed, it be the pleasure of Zeus
that the Greeks should perish utterly--it will be well.  But if they
turn upon us and pursue us, driving us back from the ships, then
shall we not be able to return.  Wherefore let us leave our chariots
here upon the brink, and go on foot against the wall."

So they went in five companies, and Hector led that which was bravest
and largest.  And in each company they joined shield to shield, and
so went against the Greeks.  And they all left their chariots by the
trench, save Asius only.  But Asius drove his chariot right up to
that gate which was on the left hand in the wall.  Now the gates
chanced to be open, for the warders had opened them, so that any of
the Greeks that fled might enter.  Now the warders were two mighty
heroes; and these, when they saw Asius and his company coming, went
without and stood in front of the gates, just as two wild boars stand
at bay against a crowd of men and dogs.  And all the while they that
stood on the wall threw heavy stones, which fell, thick as the
snowflakes fall in the winter, on the men of Troy, and loud rang the
helmets and the shields.  And many fell wounded to the death, nor
could Asius, for all his fury, win his way into the walls.  But
where, at another of the gates, Hector led the way, there appeared a
strange marvel in the skies, for an eagle was bearing in his claws a
great snake, which it had taken as a prey.  But the snake fought
fiercely for its life, and writhed itself about, even till it bit the
eagle on the breast.  Thereupon the eagle dropped it into the midst
of the host, and fled with a loud cry.  Then Polydamas, the wise
counsellor, came near to Hector and said:--


A'-si-us.


"Now it will be well that we should not follow these Greeks to their
ships.  For I take it that this marvel that we have seen is a sign to
us.  For as this eagle had caught in his claws a snake, but held it
not, dropping it before he could bear it to his young, so shall it
fare with us.  For we shall drive the Greeks to their ships, yet
shall not subdue them, but shall return in disorder by the way that
we came, leaving full many of our comrades behind us."

But Hector frowned, and answered: "Nay, but this is ill counsel,
Polydamas.  Dost thou bid me forget the command of Zeus the
Thunderer, and take heed to birds, how they fly?  Little care I
whether they go to the east or to the west, to the right or to the
left.  Surely there is but one sign for a brave man, that he be
fighting for his fatherland.  Therefore take thou heed; for if thou
holdest back from the war, or holdest back any other, lo! I will
smite thee with my spear."

Then he sprang forward, and the men of Troy followed him with a
shout.  And Zeus sent down from Ida a great blast of wind, which bore
the dust of the plain straight to the ships, troubling the hearts of
the Greeks.  Then the Trojans sought to drag down the battlements
from the wall, and to wrench up the posts which had been set to
strengthen it.  Nor did the Greeks give way, but they joined shield
to shield, and fought for the wall.  And foremost among them were
Ajax the Greater and Ajax the Less.  Just as the snow falls in
mid-winter, when the winds are hushed, and the mountain-tops are
covered, and the plains and the dwellings of men and the very shores
of the sea, up to the waves' edge, so thickly fell the stones which
the Greeks showered from the wall against the men of Troy, and which
these again threw upon the Greeks.  And still Hector and his men
availed not to break through the gate.  But at the last Zeus stirred
up the heart of his own son, Sarpedon.  Holding his shield before him
he went, and he shook in either hand a spear.  As goes a lion, when
hunger presses him sore, against a stall of oxen or a sheepfold, and
cares not though he find men and dogs keeping watch against him, so
Sarpedon went against the wall.

And on the other hand the Greeks strengthened their ranks within the
wall, for the matter was of life or death.  Long time they fought
with equal might, for neither could the Lycians break through the
wall of the Greeks and make a way to the ships, nor could the Greeks
drive back the Lycians from the wall.  Even as two neighbours,
standing with measures in their hands, contend about some boundary,
so the Lycians and the Greeks contended for the battlements.  And
many a man was wounded with the pitiless bronze, either smitten in
the back, where he was without defence, or smitten in front through
his shield; and all the battlements were bespattered with the blood
of men.

So it was till Zeus gave the glory to Hector.  He leapt within the
wall, and cried to the men of Troy, "Now follow me, and break down
the wall, and burn the ships."

So he spake, and they heard his voice, and rushed together on the
wall.  Now in front of the gate there lay a great stone, broad at the
base and sharp at the top.  Scarce could two men of the strongest,
such as are men in these days, move it with levers on to a wagon; but
Hector lifted it easily, easily as a shepherd carries in one hand the
fleece of a sheep.  Two folding doors there were in the gates, held
by bolts and a key, and at these he hurled the great stone, planting
his feet apart, that his aim might be the surer and stronger.  With a
mighty crash it came against the gates.  and the bolts held not
against it, and the hinges were broken, so that the folding doors
flew back.  Then Hector leapt into the space, holding a spear in
either hand, and his eyes flashed as fire.  And the men of Troy came
after him, some mounting the wall, and some pouring through the gates.




CHAPTER XIV

THE BATTLE AT THE SHIPS

And when Zeus had brought the Trojans near to the ships, he turned
away his eyes, and looked upon them no more, for he deemed that none
of the immortal gods would come to help either Trojan or Greek.  But
Poseidon was watching the battle from the wooded height of
Samothrace, whence he could see Ida and Troy and the ships.  And he
pitied the Greeks, when he saw how they fled before Hector, and
purposed in his heart to help them.  So he left the height of
Samothrace, and came with four strides to his palace in the depths of
the sea.  There he harnessed the horses to his chariot, and rode,
passing over the waves, and the great beasts of the sea gambolled
about him as he went, knowing their king.


Po-sei'-don.  Sa-mo-thrace'.


His horses he stabled in a cavern of the sea, and loosed them from
the car, and gave them immortal food to eat, and put shackles of gold
about their feet.

And all the while the men of Troy came on, following Hector, like a
storm or a great flame, for they thought to take the ships and to
slay the Greeks beside them.

But Poseidon came to the camp of the Greeks, taking upon him the
shape of Calchas the herald.  First he spake to either Ajax, saying:
"Hold fast, ye men of might, so that ye save the people.  For the
rest of the wall I fear not, but only for the place where Hector
rages."


Cal'-chas.


And as he spake, he smote each with his staff, and filled them with
courage, and gave strength to hands and feet.  Then he passed from
them even as a hawk that riseth from a cliff, chasing a bird.

And the Lesser Ajax knew him, and spake to his comrade, saying: "This
is some god that bids us fight for the ships; he was not Calchas, for
I marked the goings of his legs and his feet as he went.  The gods
are easily discerned.  And verily my heart within me is eager for the
fight."

The Greater Ajax answered him, "Even so do my own hands yearn about
the spear, and my heart is on fire, and my feet carry me away, and I
am eager to fight with Hector, even I alone, for all his fury."

Then Poseidon went to the other chiefs, going up and down the ranks,
and urged them to stand fast against their enemies.  But not the less
did the men of Troy press on, Hector leading the way.

And so loud was the cry of battle that it roused old Nestor where he
sat in his tent, tending the wounded Machaon.  So he went forth from
the tent, seeking King Agamemnon.  And as he went, the King met him,
and with him were Diomed and Ulysses, who also had been wounded that
day.  So they held counsel together.  And Agamemnon--for it troubled
him sore that the people were slain--would that they should draw down
the ships into the sea, and should flee homewards, as soon as the
darkness should cover them and the Trojans should cease from the
battle.

But Ulysses would have none of such counsel, saying: "Now surely, son
of Atreus, thou art not worthy to rule over us, who have been men of
war from our youth.  Wilt thou leave this city, for the taking of
which we have suffered so much?  That may not be; let not any one of
the Greeks hear thee say such words.  And what is this, that thou
wouldst have us launch our ships now, whilst the hosts are fighting?
Surely, so doing, we should perish together, for the Greeks would not
fight any more, seeing that the ships were being launched, and the
men of Troy would slay us altogether."

Then King Agamemnon said, "Thou speakest well."  And he went through
the host, bidding the men bear themselves bravely; and all the while
Poseidon put courage and strength into their hearts; and, on the
other hand, Hera lulled Zeus to sleep on the heights of Olympus, so
that now the battle went against the men of Troy.

And Ajax took a great stone--now were there many such which they had
as props for the ships--and smote Hector above the rim of his shield,
on the neck.  As an oak falls, stricken by the thunder of Zeus, so he
fell, and the Greeks rushed with a great cry to drag him to them, but
could not, for all the bravest of the sons of Troy held their shields
before him.  Then they carried him to the river, and poured water
upon him.  And after a while he sat up, and then again his spirit
left him, for the blow had been very grievous.  But when the Greeks
saw that Hector had been carried out of the battle, they pressed on
the more, slaying the men of Troy, and driving them back even out of
the camp and across the trench.  But when they came to their
chariots, where they had left them on the other side of the trench,
there they stood trembling and pale with fear, as men that flee in
the day of battle.

And now Zeus woke from his sleep, and he looked upon the earth; and
he saw how the Greeks were driving the men of Troy before them, and
Hector lay upon the plain, and vomited blood, and his friends knelt
about him.  Senseless he lay, for it was no puny hand that had dealt
the blow.  Very wroth was Zeus to see such a sight, and he said to
Hera: "What is this that thou hast done, sending Hector from the
battle?  Rememberest thou not how I hung thee amid the clouds with a
band of gold about thy hands and an anvil of gold on either foot?
Make an end of thy deceits, or verily nothing shall protect thee from
my wrath."  to

Then Hera answered: "It is Poseidon that afflicts the Trojans, and
bears up the Greeks."

Then said Zeus: "Call hither Iris and Apollo the Archer; let Iris go
to Poseidon, and bid him cease from the battle, and let Apollo
strengthen Hector, that he may go back to the battle; so shall my
will be accomplished, fulfilling the oath that I sware to Thetis of
the sea that I would do honour to her son."

Then Iris went to Poseidon, and gave him the message of Zeus.  Very
wroth was the god, and said: "Thinketh he then to control me by force
who am his equal in honour?  Three brethren are we, and the Fates
gave the sea to me for my dominion, and to Hades the realm of
darkness, and to Zeus the heaven; but the earth is for all.  I walk
not by the will of Zeus; let him remain in his own possessions, and
meddle not."

But Iris answered: "Shaker of the earth, shall I bear back so rough
an answer to Zeus?  Surely thou knowest the might of the elder born?"

Then Poseidon said, "Iris, thou speakest well; this time will I
yield, but know that if he shall scorn me and the other gods and let
Troy stand untaken, and give not victory to the Greeks, there shall
be endless feud between him and me."

Meanwhile Apollo went, at the bidding of Zeus, to Hector.  He found
him sitting up, for the will of Zeus had revived him.  Then spake
Apollo: "Hector, why sittest thou apart from thy fellows?  Hath
trouble come upon thee?"

Hector made reply in a feeble voice: "Who art thou among the gods
that speakest to me?  Knowest thou not that Ajax smote me with a
mighty stone and stayed me from the battle?  Verily I thought that I
had gone down this day to the dwellings of the dead."

But Apollo said: "Be of good cheer, for Zeus hath sent me, who am
Apollo of the Golden Sword, to stand by thee and to succour thee.
Come now, and bid thy people advance toward the ships, and I will go
before thee, and make the way easy for thy horses."

So Hector rose up in his might, and entered into the battle.  And as
men that chase a stag or a wild goat, and lo! a lion crosseth their
path, so were the Greeks afraid when they saw Hector, the son of
Priam.  And one spake, saying:--

"Surely this is a great marvel that I see with mine eyes.  For we
thought that Hector had been slain by the hand of Ajax, son of
Telamon, and now, behold! he is come back to the battle.  Many Greeks
have fallen before him, and many, methinks, will fall, for of a truth
some god has raised him up and helps him.  But come, let all the
bravest stand together.  So, mighty though he be, he shall fear to
enter our array."

And all the bravest gathered together and stood in the front, but the
multitude made for the ships.  But Hector came on, and Apollo before
him, and many of the Greeks fell slain before the sons of Troy.  Thus
the battle turned again, and came near to the trench; and now Apollo
made it easy for the men of Troy to pass, so that they left not their
chariots, as before, upon the brink, but drave them across.

And still the men of Troy came on, and still the Greeks gave way.  So
they came again, these pushing forward and these yielding ground, to
the ships.  And Hector caught hold of one of them, and the battle
raged about it; for the men of Troy and the Greeks were gathered
round, and none fought with arrows or javelins from afar, but man to
man, with battle-axe and sword and great spears pointed at either
end.  And many a fair weapon lay shattered on the ground, and the
earth flowed with blood as with a river.  But still Hector held the
stem of the ship with his hand, and called to the men of Troy that
they should bring fire, for Zeus had given them the victory that day.
Then even Ajax himself gave way, so did the spears of the Trojans
press him; for now he stood no longer upon the stern deck, but on the
rowers' bench, thrusting thence with his spear at any one who sought
to set fire to the ship.  And ever he cried to the Greeks with a
terrible voice:--

"O ye Greeks! now must ye bear yourselves like men.  For have ye any
helpers behind? or have ye any walls to shelter you?  We are here in
the plain of Troy, and the sea is close behind us, and we are far
from our country.  Wherefore all our hope is in valour, and not in
shrinking back from the battle."

And still he thrust with his spear, if any of the men of Troy, at
Hector's bidding, sought to bring fire against the ships.  Full
twelve he wounded where he stood.




CHAPTER XV

THE DEEDS AND DEATH OF PATROCLUS

Now Patroclus stood by Achilles, weeping bitterly.  Then said
Achilles: "What ails thee, Patroclus, that thou weepest like a
girl-child that runs along by her mother's side, and would be taken
up, holding her gown, and looking at her with tearful eyes till she
lift her in her arms?  Hast thou heard evil news from home?  Or art
thou weeping for the Greeks, because they perish for their folly?"

Then said Patroclus: "Be not wroth with me, great Achilles, for
indeed the Greeks are in grievous straits, and all their bravest are
wounded, and still thou cherishest thy wrath.  If thou goest not to
the battle, fearing some warning from the gods, let me go, and thy
Myrmidons with me.  And let me put thy armour on me; so shall the
Greeks have breathing-space from the war."

So he spake, entreating, nor knew that for his own doom he entreated.
And Achilles made reply:--

"It is no warning that I heed, that I keep back from the war.  These
men took from me my prize, which I won with my own hands.  But let
the past be past.  I said that I would not rise up till the battle
should come nigh to my own ships.  But thou mayest put my armour upon
thee, and lead my Myrmidons to the fight.  For in truth the men of
Troy are gathered as a dark cloud about the ships, and the Greeks
have scarce standing-ground between them and the sea.  For they see
not the gleam of my helmet, and Diomed is not there with his spear;
nor do I hear the voice of Agamemnon, but only the voice of Hector,
as he calls the men of Troy to the battle.  Go, therefore, Patroclus,
and drive the fire from the ships.  And then come thou back, nor
fight any more with the Trojans, lest thou take my glory from me.
And go not near, in the delight of battle, to the walls of Troy, lest
one of the gods meet thee to thy hurt: for the keen-archer Apollo
loves the Trojans well."

But as they talked the one to the other, Ajax could hold out no
longer.  For swords and javelins came thick upon him, and clattered
on his helmet, and his shoulder was weary with the great shield which
he held; and he breathed heavily and hard, and the great drops of
sweat fell upon the ground.  Then at the last Hector came near and
smote his spear with a great sword, so that the head fell off.  Then
was Ajax sore afraid, and gave way, and the men of Troy set torches
to the ship's stem, and a great flame shot up to the sky.  And
Achilles saw it, and smote his thigh and spake:--

"Haste thee, Patroclus, for I see the fire rising up from the ships.
Put thou on the armour, and I will call my people to the war."

So Patroclus put on the armour,--corselet, and shield, and
helmet,--and bound upon his shoulder the silver-studded sword, and
took a mighty spear in his hand.  But the great spear of Achilles he
took not, for that no man but Achilles might wield.  Then Automedon
yoked the horses to the chariot, Bayard and Piebald, and with them in
the side harness, Pedasus; and the two first were deathless steeds,
but the third was mortal.


Au-tom'-e-don.  Ped'-a-sus.


Meanwhile Achilles had called the Myrmidons to battle.  Fifty ships
had he brought to Troy, and in each there were fifty men.

Then Achilles said: "Forget not, ye Myrmidons, the bold words that ye
spake against the men of Troy during the days of my wrath, making
complaint that I kept you from the battle against your will.  Now,
therefore, ye have that which ye desired."

So the Myrmidons went to the battle in close array, helmet to helmet
and shield to shield, close as the stones with which a builder builds
a wall And in front went Patroclus, and Automedon in the chariot
beside him.  Then Achilles went to his tent and took from the chest a
great cup, which Thetis his mother had given him.  Now no man drank
of that cup but he only, nor did he pour out of it offerings to any
of the gods except to Zeus.  This first he cleansed with sulphur, and
then with water from the spring.  And after this he washed his hands,
and stood in the midst of the space before his tent, and poured out
of it to Zeus, saying, "O Zeus, I send my comrade to this battle;
make him strong and bold, and give him glory, and bring him home safe
to the ships, and my people with him."

So he prayed, and Father Zeus heard him, and part he granted and part
denied.

But now Patroclus with the Myrmidons had come to where the battle was
raging about the ships, and when the men of Troy beheld him, they
thought that Achilles had forgotten his wrath and was come forth to
the war.  Then the men of Troy turned to flee, and many chiefs of
fame fell by the spears of the Greeks.  So the battle rolled back to
the trench, and in the trench many chariots of the Trojans were
broken, but the horses of Achilles went across it at a stride, so
nimble were they and strong.  And the heart of Patroclus was set to
slay Hector; but he could not overtake him, so swift were his horses.
Then did Patroclus turn his chariot, and keep back those that fled,
and rushed hither and thither, still slaying as he went.

But Sarpedon, when he saw the Lycians dismayed and scattered, called
to them that they should be of good courage, saying that he would
himself make trial of this great warrior.  So he leapt down from his
chariot, and Patroclus also leapt down, and they rushed at each other
as two eagles rush together.  And Sarpedon, who had a spear in either
hand, with the one struck the horse Pedasus, which was of mortal
breed, on the right shoulder, and with the other missed his aim,
sending it over the left shoulder of Patroclus.  But Patroclus missed
not his aim, driving his spear into Sarpedon's heart.  Then fell the
great Lycian chief, as an oak, or a poplar, or a pine falls upon the
hills before the axe.  But he called to Glaucus, his companion,
saying: "Now must thou show thyself a good warrior, Glaucus.  First
call the men of Lycia to fight for me, and do thou fight thyself, for
it would be foul shame to thee, all thy days, if the Greeks should
spoil me of my arms."

Then with a great shout the Lycians and the Trojans charged, and
drove the Greeks back a space from the body; and then again the
Greeks did the like.  And so the battle raged, till no one would have
known the great Sarpedon, so covered was he with spears and blood and
dust.  But at the last the Greeks drave back the men of Troy from the
body, and stripped the arms, but the body itself they harmed not.
For Apollo came down at the bidding of Zeus and carried it out of the
midst of the battle, and washed it with water, and anointed it with
ambrosia, and wrapped it in garments of the gods.  And then he gave
it to Sleep and Death, and these two carried it to Lycia, his
fatherland.

Then did Patroclus forget the word which Achilles had spoken to him,
that he should not go near to Troy, for he pursued the men to the
city, even to the wall.  Thrice he mounted on the angle of the wall,
and thrice Apollo himself drove him back, pushing his shining shield.
But the fourth time the god said: "Go thou back, Patroclus.  It is
not for thee to take the city of Troy; no, nor for Achilles, who is
far better than thou art."

So Patroclus went back, fearing the wrath of the archer god.  Then
Apollo stirred up the spirit of Hector, that he should go against
Patroclus.  Therefore he went, with his brother Cebriones for driver
of his chariot.  But when they came near, Patroclus cast a great
stone which he had in his hand, and smote Cebriones on the forehead,
crushing it in, so that he fell headlong from the chariot.  And
Patroclus mocked him, saying:--


Ceb-ri'-o-nes.


"How nimble is this man! how lightly he dives!  What spoil he would
take of oysters, diving from a ship, even in a stormy sea!  Who would
have thought that there were such skilful divers in Troy!"

Then again the battle waxed hot about the body of Cebriones, and this
too, at the last, the Greeks drew unto themselves, and spoiled it of
the arms.  And this being accomplished, Patroclus rushed against the
men of Troy.  Thrice he rushed, and each time he slew nine chiefs of
fame.  But the fourth time Apollo stood behind him and struck him on
the head and shoulders, so that his eyes were darkened.  And the
helmet fell from off his head, so that the horse-hair plumes were
soiled with dust.  Never before had it touched the ground, for it was
the helmet of Achilles.  And also the god brake the spear in his
hand, and struck the shield from his arms, and loosed his corselet.
All amazed he stood, and then Euphorbus smote him on the back with
his spear, but slew him not.  Then Patroclus sought to flee to the
ranks of his comrades.  But Hector saw him, and thrust at him with
his spear, smiting him in the groin, so that he fell.  And when the
Greeks saw him fail, they sent up a terrible cry.  Then Hector stood
over him and cried:--

"Didst thou think to spoil our city, Patroclus, and to carry away our
wives and daughters in the ships?  But lo! I have slain thee, and the
fowls of the air shall eat thy flesh; nor shall the great Achilles
help thee at all--  Achilles, who bade thee strip the tunic from my
breast, and thou thoughtest in thy folly to do it."


Eu-phor'-bus.


But Patroclus answered: "Thou boasteth much, Hector.  Yet thou didst
not slay me, but Apollo, who took from me my arms, for had twenty
such as thou met me, I had slain them all.  And mark thou this: death
and fate are close to thee by the hand of the great Achilles."

And Hector answered, but Patroclus was dead already: "Why dost thou
prophesy death to me?  May be the great Achilles himself shall fall
by my hand.

Then he drew his spear from the wound, and went after Automedon, to
slay him, but the swift horses of Achilles carried him away.




CHAPTER XVI

THE ROUSING OF ACHILLES

Fierce was the fight about the body of Patroclus, and many heroes
fell, both on this side and on that, and first of them all Euphorbus,
who first had wounded him.  For as he came near to strip the dead man
of his arms, Menelaus slew him with his spear.  He slew him, but took
not his arms, for Hector came through the battle; nor did Menelaus
dare to abide his coming, but went back into the ranks of his own
people.  Then did Hector strip off the arms of Patroclus, the arms
which the great Achilles had given him to wear.  Then he laid hold of
the body, and would have dragged it into the host of the Trojans, but
Ajax Telamon came forth, and put his broad shield before it, as a
lion stands before its cubs when the hunters meet it in the woods,
drawing down over its eyes its shaggy brows.  Then Hector gave place,
but Glaucus saw him, and said:--

"Now is this a shame to thee, that thou darest not to stand against
Ajax.  How wilt thou and thy countrymen save the city of Troy?  For
surely no more will thy allies fight for it.  Small profit have they
of thee.  Did not Sarpedon fall, and didst thou not leave him to be a
prey to the dogs?  And now, if thou hadst stood firm and carried off
Patroclus, we might have made exchange, and gained from the Greeks
Sarpedon and his arms.  But it may not be, for thou fearest Ajax, and
fleest before him."

But Hector said: "I fear him not, nor any man.  Only Zeus giveth
victory now to one man and now to another.  But wait thou here, and
see whether I be a coward, as thou sayest."

Now he had sent the armour of Patroclus to the city.  But now he ran
after those that were carrying it, and overtook them, and put on the
armour himself (but Zeus saw him doing it, and liked it not), and
came back to the battle; and all who saw him thought that it had been
the great Achilles himself.  Then they all charged together, and
fiercer grew the battle and fiercer as the day went on.  For the
Greeks said one to another: "Now had the earth better yawn and
swallow us up alive, than we should let the men of Troy carry off
Patroclus to their city;" and the Trojans said: "Now if we must all
fall by the body of this man, be it so, but we will not yield."  But
the horses of Achilles stood apart from the battle, when they knew
that Patroclus was dead, and wept.  Nor could Automedon move them
with the lash, nor with gentle words, nor with threats.  They would
not return to the ships, nor would they go into the battle; but as a
pillar stands on the tomb of some dead man, so they stood, with their
heads drooped to the ground, and with big tears dropping to the
earth, and their long manes trailing in the dust.

But Father Zeus beheld them, and pitied them, and said:--

"It was not well that we gave you, immortal as ye are, to a mortal
man; for of all things that, move on earth, mortal man is the fullest
of sorrow.  But Hector shall not possess you.  It is enough for him,
yea, and too much, that he hath the arms of Achilles."

Then did the horses move from their place, and obey their charioteers
as before.  Nor could Hector take them, though he desired them very
much.  And all the while the battle raged about the dead Patroclus.
And at last Ajax said to Menelaus (now these two had borne themselves
more bravely in the fight than all others):--

"See if thou canst find Antilochus, Nestor's son, that he may carry
the tidings to Achilles, how that Patroclus is dead."


An-til'-o-chus.


So Menelaus went and found Antilochus on the left of the battle, and
said to him: "I have ill news for thee.  Thou seest that the men of
Troy have the victory to-day.  And also Patroclus lies dead.  Run,
therefore, to Achilles, and tell him, if haply he may save the body;
but as for the arms, Hector has them already."

Sore dismayed was Antilochus to hear such tidings, and his eyes were
filled with tears, and his voice was choked.  Yet did he give heed to
the words of Menelaus, and ran to tell Achilles of what had chanced.
But Menelaus went back to Ajax, where he had left him by Patroclus,
and said:--

"Antilochus, indeed, bears the tidings to Achilles.  Yet I doubt
whether he will come, for all his wrath against Hector, seeing that
he has no armour to cover him.  Let us think, then, how we may best
carry Patroclus away from the men of Troy."

Then said Ajax, "Do thou and Meriones run forward and raise the body
in your arms, and I and Ajax the Less will keep off, meanwhile, the
men of Troy."


Me-ri'-o-nes.


So Menelaus and Meriones ran forward and lifted up the body, And the
Trojans ran forward with a great shout when they saw them, as dogs
run barking before the hunters when they chase a wild boar; but when
the beast turns to bay, then they flee this way and that.  So did the
men of Troy flee when Ajax the Greater and Ajax the Less turned to
give battle.  But still the Greeks gave way, and still the Trojans
came on, and ever in the front were Hector, the son of Priam, and
Æneas, the son of Anchises.  But in the meantime Antilochus came near
to Achilles, who, indeed, seeing that the Greeks fled and the men of
Troy pursued, was already sore afraid.  And he said, weeping as he
spake:--


An-chi'-ses.


"I bring ill news,--Patroclus lies low.  The Greeks fight for his
body, but Hector has his arms."

Then Achilles took of the dust of the plain in his hand, and poured
it on his head, and lay at his length upon the ground, and tare his
hair.  And all the women wailed.  And Antilochus sat weeping; but
ever he held the hands of Achilles, lest he should slay himself in
his great grief.

Then came his mother, hearing his cry, from where she sat in the
depths of the sea, and laid her hand on him and said:--

"Why weepest thou, my son?  Hide not the matter from me, but tell me."

And Achilles answered: "All that Zeus promised thee for me he hath
fulfilled.  But what profit have I, for my friend Patroclus is dead,
and Hector has the arms which I gave him to wear.  And as for me, I
care not to live, except I can avenge me upon him."

Then said Thetis: "Nay, my son, speak not thus.  For when Hector
dieth, thy doom also is near."

And Achilles spake in great wrath: "Would that I might die this hour,
seeing that I could not help my friend, but am a burden on the
earth--I, who am better in battle than all the Greeks besides.
Cursed be the wrath that sets men to strive the one with the other,
even as it set me to strive with King Agamemnon!  But let the past be
past.  And as for my fate--let it come when it may, so that I first
avenge myself on Hector.  Therefore, seek not to keep me back from
the battle."

Then Thetis said: "Be it so; only thou canst not go without thy arms,
which Hector hath.  But to-morrow will I go to Hephæstus, that he may
furnish thee anew."

But while they talked the men of Troy pressed the Greeks more and
more, and the two heroes, Ajax the Greater and Ajax the Less, could
no longer keep Hector back, but that he should lay hold of the body
of Patroclus.  And indeed he would have taken it, but that Zeus sent
Iris to Achilles, who said:--

"Rouse thee, son of Peleus, or Patroclus will be a prey for the dogs
of Troy!"

But Achilles said: "How shall I go?--for arms have I none, nor know I
whose I might wear."

Then answered Iris, "Go only to the trench and show thyself; so shall
the men of Troy tremble and cease from the battle, and the Greeks
shall have breathing-space."

Then went he to the trench; with the battle he mingled not, heeding
his mother's commands, but he shouted aloud, and his voice was as the
sound of a trumpet.  And when the men of Troy heard, they were
stricken with fear, and the horses backed with the chariots, and the
drivers were astonished when they saw the flaming fire above his head
which Athene had kindled.  Thrice across the trench the great
Achilles shouted, and thrice the men of Troy fell back.  And that
hour there perished twelve chiefs of fame, wounded by their own
spears or trampled by their own steeds, so great was the terror among
the men of Troy.

Right gladly did the Greeks take Patroclus out of the press.  Then
they laid him on a bier, and carried him to the tent, Achilles
walking with many tears by his side.




CHAPTER XVII

THE MAKING OF THE ARMS

And Achilles stood among his Myrmidons and said:--

"Vain was the promise that I made to Menœtius that I would bring
back his son with his portion of the spoils of Troy.  For he lies
dead, nor shall I return to the house of Peleus, my father, for I,
too, must die in this land.  But thee, O Patroclus, I will not bury
till I bring hither the head and the arms of Hector, and twelve men
of Troy to slay at thy funeral pile."


Men-œ'-ti-us.


So they washed the body of Patroclus and anointed it, putting
ointment nine years old into the wounds, and laid it on a bed, and
covered it with a linen cloth from the head to the feet, and laid a
white robe over it.  All night the Myrmidons mourned for Patroclus
dead.

But Thetis went to the house of Hephæstus.  She found him busy at his
work, making twenty cauldrons with three feet, that were to stand
about the house of the gods.  Golden wheels had they beneath, that
they might go of their own motion into the chambers of the gods, and
of their own motion return.  But Grace, the wife of Hephæstus, espied
Thetis, and caught her by the hands, and led her in, and set her on a
silver-studded chair, and put a chair beneath her feet.  Then she
called to her husband, saying:--

"Come quick.  Thetis would have somewhat of thee."

And he said: "Verily, she was my saviour in the day of trouble; for
my mother cast me out because I was lame, but Thetis and her sister
received me in the sea.  Nine years I dwelt with them, and hammered
many a trinket in a hollow cave.  Verily, I would pay the price of my
life for Thetis."

Then he put away his tools, and washed himself, and took a staff in
his hand, and came into the house, and sat upon a chair, and said:
"Speak all thy mind.  I will do thy pleasure, if it can be done."

Then did Thetis tell him of her son Achilles, and of the wrong that
had been done to him, and of his wrath, and of how Patroclus was
dead, and that the arms that he had had were lost.

"Make me now," she said, "for him a shield and a helmet, and greaves,
and a corselet."


greaves, armour for the legs.


And Hephæstus answered: "Be of good cheer.  Would that I could keep
from him the doom of death as easily as I can make him such arms that
a man will wonder when he looks upon them."

Then he went to his smithy, and turned the bellows to the fire, and
bade them work.  Also he put bronze and tin and gold and silver into
the fire, to melt them, and set the anvil, and took the hammer in one
hand, and the tongs in the other.

First he made a shield, great and strong, and fastened thereto a belt
of silver.  On it he wrought the earth, and the sky, and the sea, and
the sun, and the moon, and all the stars.  He wrought also two
cities.  In the one there was peace, and about the other there was
war.  For in the first they led a bride to her home with music and
dancing, and the women stood in the doors to see the show, but about
the other city there sat an army besieging it, and the men of the
city stood upon the wall defending it.  These had also set an ambush
by a river where the herds were wont to drink.  And when the herds
came down, they rose up and took them and slew the herdsmen.  But the
army of the besiegers heard the cry, and came swiftly on horses, and
fought by the bank of the river.  Also he wrought one field where
many men drove the plough, and another where reapers reaped the corn,
and boys gathered it in their arms to bind into sheaves, while the
lord stood glad at heart, beholding them.  Also he wrought a
vineyard, wherein was a path, and youths and maidens bearing baskets
of grapes, and in the midst a boy played on a harp of gold and sang a
pleasant song.  Also he made a herd of oxen going from the stables to
the pastures, and herdsmen and dogs, and in the front two lions had
caught a mighty bull and were devouring it, while the dogs stood far
off and barked.  Also he made a sheepfold; also a marvellous dance of
men and maidens, and these had coronets of gold, and those daggers of
gold hanging from belts of silver.  And round about the shield he
wrought the great river of ocean.

Besides the shield, he also made corselet brighter than fire, and a
great helmet with a ridge of gold for the crest, and greaves of tin.
And when he had finished all the armour, he set them before the
mother of Achilles.  Like to a hawk did she leap from Olympus,
carrying them to her son.  And when she came to the ships, she found
him lying on the earth with his arms about the body of Patroclus,
weeping aloud, and his men stood about lamenting.

The goddess stood in the midst, and clasped her son by the hand, and
spake: "Come, now, let us leave the dead man; for he hath been slain
according to the ordering of the gods.  And do thou receive from
Hephæstus this armour, exceeding beautiful, such as man never yet
wore upon his shoulders."

So she spake, and cast the armour before Achilles.  Loud did it
rattle as it fell, and the Myrmidons feared to look upon the sight.
But Achilles took the splendid armour into his hand, and was glad,
and spake, saying: "Mother, the gods have given me arms, such as it
is fitting should be made in heaven, and I vow I will arm me for the
fight.  Yet much I fear that decay will mar the body of Patroclus,
now that the life hath gone from out of it."

But Thetis made answer: "Let not this trouble thee; I will keep decay
from his flesh, yea, though he should lie here till the year come
round again.  Go, then, and call the people to the assembly, and put
away thy wrath against King Agamemnon, and arm thyself for the
battle."

So she spake, putting trust and valour into his soul; and into the
nostrils of the dead man she poured ambrosia and ruddy nectar, that
his flesh might be sweet.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE ENDING OF THE STRIFE

Achilles went along the shore of the sea, shouting aloud to the
warriors.  And at his call they came; and also Diomed and Ulysses
came to the assembly, leaning on spears, for their wounds were fresh,
and King Agamemnon.

Then Achilles stood up, and spake: "It was ill done, son of Atreus,
that we strove for a woman!  Would that Artemis had slain her with an
arrow on the day when I took her captive!  Many a Greek who hath now
bitten the ground had then lived, and the Trojans had not reaped such
profit from our wrath.  But come, let the past be past.  Here I make
an end of my anger.  And now make haste, and send the Greeks to
battle.  Let us see whether the men of Troy will camp beside the
ships."

Then said Agamemnon, speaking from his place: "Listen, ye Greeks.
Oft have ye blamed me for this quarrel.  Yet it was not I that was in
fault; rather it was Zeus and Fate, and the Fury that walketh in
darkness.  But to thee, Achilles, I make full amends, for here I
offer thee the gifts which Ulysses promised thee yesterday.  Stay for
a time, while my people bring them from my ships."

To him Achilles made answer: "Give thy gifts, O King, if it be thy
will, or keep them to thyself.  But let us turn without delay to the
battle."

Then spake the wise Ulysses: "Achilles, urge not the Greeks to enter
fasting into the battle: for verily the strife will not be short.  A
man that hath not eaten cannot fight till set of sun, for his limbs
grow heavy unawares, and he is hindered by hunger and thirst.  Bid,
therefore, the people disperse, and make ready their food.
Meanwhile, let King Agamemnon send for the gifts and deliver them to
thee in full assembly.  And afterwards let him furnish a feast."

Then said the King: "Thou speakest well, Ulysses.  Do them thyself
fetch the gifts, and let the herald fetch us a boar, that we may do
sacrifice to Zeus and to the Sun."

But Achilles said: "Now the dead whom Hector slew lieth low, and ye
bid me think of food.  Let the Greeks enter fasting into battle, and
make them a great supper when the sun goes down.  As for me, neither
food nor drink shall pass my lips."

To him Ulysses made reply: "Thou art the stronger, son of Peleus, yet
I may be the wiser, for I am older than thou, and of more experience.
Ask not the Greeks to fast because of the dead.  Verily they fall
every day.  Rather let us bury him that dieth, and bewail him for a
day, and harden our hearts to forget: and then let us who are left
eat and drink, that we may fight with better heart."

Then did Ulysses go to the tent of the King; and they brought thence
the gifts, the treasure, and twelve horses, and seven women, skilled
workers with the needle, and the fair Briseis the eighth.

These the Myrmidons took to the tent of Achilles.  But when Briseis
saw Patroclus, she beat her breast and her fair face and neck, and
wailed aloud, for he had been gentle and good, she said.  And all the
women wailed with her, thinking each of her own sorrows.

Then the chiefs would have Achilles feast with them; but he hearkened
not, for he would neither eat nor drink till he had had vengeance for
the dead.  And he spake, saying: "Often, Patroclus, hast thou ordered
the feast when we were hastening to the war.  And now thou liest
slain, and for grief for thee I cannot eat nor drink.  For greater
sorrow could not have come to me.  Often did I think that I only
should perish here, but that thou shouldst return and show my son all
that was mine, goods and servants and palace."

And as he wept, the old men wept with him, thinking each of what he
had left at home.

But Zeus said to Athene: "Carest thou not for Achilles that is so
dear to thee?  See, the other Greeks are gone to their meal, but he
sits fasting."

Then Athene leapt down from heaven, and shed into the breast of
Achilles nectar and ambrosia, that his knees should not fail from
hunger.

Meanwhile the Greeks poured out to battle, and in the midst Achilles
armed himself.  He put the lordly greaves about his legs, and fitted
the corselet on his breast.  From his shoulders he hung the sword,
and he took the great shield that Hephæstus had made, and it blazed
as it were the heaven.  Also he put the helmet on his head, and the
plumes waved all around.  Then he made trial of the arms, and they
fitted him well, and bare him up like wings.  Last he drew from its
case his father's spear, which none might wield but Achilles' self.
Then he spake to his horses: "Take heed, Bayard and Piebald, that ye
save your driver to-day, nor leave him dead on the field, as ye left
Patroclus."

Then Hera gave to the horse Bayard a voice, so that he spake: "Surely
we will save thee, great Achilles; yet for all that, doom is near to
thee, nor are we the cause, but the gods and mastering Fate.  Nor was
it of us that Patroclus died, but Apollo slew him and gave the glory
to Hector.  So shalt thou, too, die by the hands of a god and of a
mortal man."

And Achilles said: "What need to tell me of my doom?  Right well I
know it.  Yet will I not cease till I have made the Trojans weary of
battle."




CHAPTER XIX

THE BATTLE AT THE RIVER

Thus did Achilles go again into the battle, eager above all things to
meet with Hector and to slay him.

But Apollo stood by Æneas, and spake to him, "Æneas, where are now
thy boastings that thou wouldst meet Achilles face to face?"

Then Æneas answered: "Nay, I have stood up against him in the day
when he took the town of Lyrnessus.  But I fled before him, and only
my nimble feet saved me from falling by his spear.  Surely a god is
ever with him, making his spear to fly aright."


Lyr-nes'-sus.


Him Apollo answered again: "Thou, too, art the son of a goddess, and
thy mother is greater than his, for she is but a daughter of the Sea.
Drive straight at him with thy spear, and let not his threats dismay
thee."

Then Æneas cast his spear, and it struck the shield of Achilles with
so dreadful a sound that the hero feared lest it should pierce it
through, knowing not that the gifts of the gods are not easy for
mortal man to vanquish.  Two folds, indeed, it pierced, that were of
bronze, but in the gold it was stayed, and there were yet two of tin
within.  Then Achilles cast his spear.  Through the shield of Æneas
it passed, and though it wounded him not, yet was he sore dismayed,
so near it came.  Then Achilles drew his sword, and rushed on Æneas,
and Æneas caught up a great stone to cast at him.  But it was not the
will of the gods that Æneas should perish, seeing that he and his
sons after him should rule over the men of Troy in the ages to come.
Therefore Poseidon lifted him up, and bore him over the ranks of men
to the left of the battle, but first he drew the spear out of the
shield, and laid it at the feet of Achilles.  Much the hero marvelled
to see it, crying: "This is a great wonder that I behold with mine
eyes.  For I see my spear before me, but the man whom I sought to
slay I see not.  Of a truth Æneas spake truth, saying that he was
dear to the immortal gods."

Then he rushed into the battle, slaying as he went.  And Hector would
have met him, but Apollo stood by him, and said, "Fight not with
Achilles, lest he slay thee."  Therefore he went back among the men
of Troy.  Many did Achilles slay, and among them Polydorus, son of
Priam, who, because he was the youngest and very dear, his father
suffered not to go to the battle.  Yet he went, in his folly, and
being very swift of foot, he trusted in his speed, running through
the foremost of the fighters.  But as he ran, Achilles smote him, and
wounded him to the death.  When Hector saw it, he could not bear any
more to stand apart.  Therefore he rushed at Achilles, and Achilles
rejoiced to see him, saying, "This is the man who slew my comrade."
And to Hector he cried, "Come hither, and taste of death."


Pol-y-do'-rus.


And Hector made answer: "Son of Peleus, seek not to make me afraid
with words.  For though I be weaker than thou, yet victory lieth on
the knees of the gods, and I, too, bear a spear."

Then he cast his spear; but Athene turned it aside with her breath,
and laid it again at his feet.  And when Achilles leapt upon Hector
with a shout, Apollo snatched him away.  Three times did Achilles
leap upon him, and three times he struck only the mist.  But the
fourth time he cried with a terrible voice, "Dog, thou hast escaped
from death, Apollo helping thee; but I shall meet thee again, and
make an end of thee."

Then Achilles turned to the others, and slew multitudes of them, so
that they fled, some across the plain, and some to the river, the
eddying Xanthus.  And these leapt into the water as locusts leap into
a river when a fire which men light drives them from the fields.  And
all the river was full of horses and men.  Then Achilles leapt into
the stream, leaving his spear on the bank, resting on the tamarisk
trees.  Only his sword had he, and with this he slew many; and they
were as fishes which fly from some great dolphin in the sea.  And
when Achilles was weary of slaying, he took twelve alive, whom he
would slay on the tomb of Patroclus.

Then there met him Asteropæus, who was the grandson of a river-god
Axius.  And Achilles wondered to see him, and said, "Who art thou,
that standest against me?"


As-ter-o-pæ'-us.  Ax'-i-us.


And he said, "I am the grandson of the river-god Axius, fairest of
all the streams on the earth."

And as he spake he cast two spears, one with each hand, for he could
use either alike; and the one struck the shield, nor pierced it
through, for the gold stayed it, and the other grazed the right hand
so that the blood spurted forth.  Then did Achilles cast his spear,
but missed his aim, and the great spear stood fast in the bank.  And
thrice Asteropæus strove to draw it forth.  Thrice he strove in vain,
and the fourth time he strove to break the spear.  But as he strove
Achilles smote him so that he died.  Yet had he some glory, for he
had wounded the great Achilles.




CHAPTER XX

THE BATTLE OF THE GODS

When the River saw that Asteropæus was dead, he took upon him the
shape of a man, and spake to Achilles, saying: "Truly, Achilles, thou
excellest all other men in might and deeds of blood, for the gods
themselves protect thee.  It may be that Zeus hath given thee to slay
all the sons of Troy; nevertheless, depart from me and work thy will
upon the plain; for my stream is choked with the multitude of
corpses, nor can I pass to the sea.  Do thou, therefore, cease from
troubling me."

To him Achilles made answer: "This shall be as thou wilt, O
Scamander.  But the Trojans I will not cease from slaying till I have
driven them into their city and have made trial of Hector, whether I
shall vanquish him or he shall vanquish me."

And as he spake he sped on, pursuing the Trojans.  Then the River
cried to Apollo: "Little thou doest the will of thy father, thou of
the Silver Bow, who bade thee stand by the men of Troy and help them
till darkness should cover the land."  And he rushed on with a great
wave, stirring together all his streams.  The dead bodies he threw
upon the shore, roaring as a bull roareth; and them that lived he hid
in the depth of his eddies.  And all about Achilles rose up the
flood, beating full upon his shield, so that he could not stand fast
upon his feet.  Then Achilles laid hold of a lime tree, fair and
tall, that grew upon the bank; but the tree brake therefrom with all
its roots, and tare down the bank, and lay across the River, staying
its flow, for it had many branches.  Thereupon Achilles leapt out of
the water and sped across the plain, being sore afraid.  But the
River ceased not from pursuing him, that he might stay him from
slaughter and save the sons of Troy.  So far as a man may throw a
spear, so far did Achilles leap.  And still as he fled the River
pursued after him with a great roar.

And when Achilles would have stood against the River, seeking to know
whether indeed all the gods were against him, then the great wave
smote upon his shoulders; and when he leapt into the air, it bowed
his knees beneath him and devoured the ground from under his feet.
Then Achilles looked up to heaven and groaned, crying out: "O Zeus,
will none of the gods pity me, and save me from the River?  I care
not what else may befall me.  Truly my mother hath deceived me,
saying that I should perish under the walls of Troy by the arrows of
Apollo.  Surely it had been better that Hector should slay me, for he
is the bravest of the men of Troy, but now I shall perish miserably
in the River, as some herdboy perisheth whom a torrent sweepeth away
in a storm."

So he spake; but Poseidon and Athene stood by him, having taken upon
them the shape of men, and took him by the hand and strengthened him
with comforting words, for Poseidon spake, saying: "Son of Peletis,
tremble not, neither be afraid.  It is not thy fate to be mastered by
the River.  He shall soon cease from troubling thee.  And do thou
heed what we say.  Stay not thy hands from the battle, till thou
shalt have driven all the sons of Troy that escape thee within the
walls of the city.  And when thou shalt have slain Hector, go back to
the ships; for this day is the day of thy glory."

Then the two departed from him.  Now all the plain was covered with
water, wherein floated much fair armour and many dead bodies.  But
Achilles went on even against the stream, nor could the River hold
him back; for Athene put great might into his heart.  Yet did not
Scamander cease, from his wrath, but lifted his waves yet higher, and
cried aloud to Simois: "Dear brother, let us two stay the fury of
this man, or else of a surety he will destroy the city of Priam.
Come now, fill all thy streams and rouse thy torrents against him,
and lift up against him a mighty wave with tree-trunks and stones,
that we may stay this wild man from his fighting.  Neither his might,
nor his beauty, nor his fair form shall profit him, for they shall be
covered with much mud; and over him will I heap sand beyond all
counting.  Neither shall the Greeks be able to gather his bones
together, with such a heap will I hide them."


Si'-mo-is.


Then he rushed again upon Achilles, swelling high with foam and blood
and dead bodies of men.  Very dark was the wave as it rose, and was
like to have overwhelmed the man, so that Hera greatly feared for
him, lest the River should sweep him away.  And she cried to
Hephæstus, her son, saying: "Rouse thee, Haltfoot, my son!  Come,
help us, and bring much fire with thee; and I will call the west wind
and the south wind from the sea, with such a storm as shall consume
the sons of Troy, both them and their arms.  And do thou burn the
trees that are by the banks of Xanthus, yea, and the River himself.
And let him not turn thee from thy purpose by fury or by craft; but
burn till I shall bid thee cease."

Then Hephæstus lit a great fire.  First it burned the dead bodies
that lay upon the plain, and it dried all the plain, as the north
wind in the autumn time dries a field, to the joy of him that tills
it.  After this it laid hold of the River.  The lime tree and the
willows and the tamarisks it burned; also the plants that grew in the
streams.  And the eels and the fishes were sore distressed, twisting
hither and thither in the water, being troubled by the breath of
Hephæstus.  So the might of the River was subdued, and he cried
aloud: "O Hephæstus, no one of the gods can match himself with thee.
Cease now from consuming me; and Achilles may drive the men of Troy
from the city if he will.  What have I to do with the strife and
sorrow of men?"

And Queen Hera heard him, and called to Hephæstus, saying: "Cease, my
son; it doth not beseem thee to work such damage to a god for the
sake of a mortal man."

So Hephæstus quenched his fire, and the River flowed as he flowed
before.

But among the other gods there arose a dreadful strife, for they were
divided, the one part against the other.  With a great crash they
came together, and the broad earth resounded, and the heavens rang as
with the voice of a trumpet; and Zeus heard it as he sat on Olympus,
and was glad in heart to see the gods join in battle.

First of all, Ares, the shield-piercer, rushed against Athene,
holding his spear in his hand, and cried: "Why dost thou make the
gods to strive in battle, thou that art bold as a fly and shameless
as a dog?  Dost thou not remember how thou didst set Diomed, the son
of Tydeus, upon me to wound me, and how thou didst take his spear in
thy hand, so that all might see it, and drive it through my thigh?
Now will I repay thee for all that thou hast done."

And he smote on the shield--the mighty shield that not even the
thunder of Zeus can break.  But Athene took up in her hand a great
stone that lay upon the plain.  Black it was and rough, and very
great, that men of old had set for a boundary of the field.  With
this she smote Ares on the neck, that his knees failed beneath him.
He lay along the ground, a hundred feet and more, and Athene laughed
when she saw him, and cried: "Fool! hast thou not yet learned how
much stronger I am than thou, that thou matchest thy might against
me?  Lie there and suffer the curses of thy mother; for she is wroth
because thou hast betrayed the Greeks and helpest the men of Troy."

But Aphrodite took him by the hand, and would have led him away; deep
did he groan, and scarce could he gather his spirit together.  And
when Hera saw it, she cried to Athene, saying: "See now, how
Aphrodite would lead Ares out of the battle!  Pursue her now, and
hinder her."

So Athene pursued after her, and smote her on the breast with her
heavy hand; and her knees failed beneath her.  So these two lay upon
the earth, and Athene cried over them: "Now would that all who help
the sons of Troy were as brave and strong as these two.  Long since
had we ceased from war and destroyed the fair city of Troy."




CHAPTER XXI

THE SLAYING OF HECTOR

While these things were doing, Achilles ceased not to pursue and slay
the men of Troy, and Priam stood on a tower of the wall and saw the
people.  Sore troubled was he, and he hastened down to the gates and
said to the keepers, "Keep the gates open, that the people may enter
in, for they fly before Achilles."  So the keepers held the gates
open, and the people hastened in, wearied with toil and thirst, and
covered with dust, and Achilles followed close upon them.  And that
hour would the Greeks have taken the city of Troy, but that Apollo
saved it.  For he put courage into the heart of Agenor, standing also
by him, that he should not be slain.  And Agenor thought within
himself:--


A-ge'-nor.


"Shall I flee with these others?  Nay, for Achilles will take me and
slay me, and I shall die as a coward dies.  Or shall I flee across
the plain to Ida, and hide me in the thickets, and come back at
nightfall to the city?  Yet should he see me he will overtake me and
smite me, so swift of foot is lie and strong.  But what if I stand to
meet him before the gates?  He, too, is a mortal man, and his flesh
may be pierced by the spear."

Wherefore he stood till Achilles should come near.  And when he came
he cast his spear, striking the leg below the knee, but the greave
turned off the spear, so strong was it.  And when Achilles would have
slain him, lo! Apollo lifted him up and set him within the city.  And
that the men of Troy might have time to enter, he took upon him
Agenor's shape.  And the false Agenor fled, and Achilles pursued.
But meanwhile the men of Troy flocked into the city, nor did they
stay to ask who was safe and who was dead, in such haste and fear did
they flee.  Only Hector remained outside the walls, standing in front
of the great Scæan gates.  But all the while Achilles was fiercely
pursuing the false Agenor, till at last Apollo turned and spake to
him:--

"Why dost thou pursue me, swift-footed Achilles?  Hast thou not yet
found out that I am a god, and that all thy fury is in vain?  And now
all the sons of Troy are safe in their city, and thou art here, far
out of the way, seeking to slay me, who cannot die."

In great wrath Achilles answered him: "Thou hast done me wrong in so
drawing me away from the wall, great archer, most mischief-loving of
all the gods that are.  Had it not been for this, many a Trojan more
had bitten the ground.  Thou hast robbed me of great glory, and saved
thy favourites.  O that I had the power to take vengeance on thee!
Thou wouldst have paid dearly for thy cheat!"

Then he turned and rushed towards the city, swift as a race-horse
whirls a chariot across the plain.  Old Priam spied him from the
walls, with his glittering armour, bright as that brightest of the
stars--men call it Orion's dog--which shines at vintage-time.  And
the old man groaned aloud when he saw him, and stretching out his
hands, cried to his son Hector, who stood before the gates, eager to
do battle with this dread warrior:--


O-ri'-on.


"Wait not for this man, dear son, wait not for him, lest thou die
beneath his hand, for indeed he is stronger than thou.  Come within
the walls, dear child; come to save the sons and daughters of Troy;
come in pity for me, thy father, for whom, in my old age, an evil
fate is in store, to see sons slain with the sword, and daughters
carried into captivity, and babes dashed upon the ground."

And his mother besought him also, but in vain.  He was still minded
to abide the coming of Achilles.  Just as in the mountains a great
snake at its hole abides the coming of a man; fierce glare its eyes,
and it coils its tail about its hole: so Hector waited for Achilles.

And Achilles came near, brandishing over his right shoulder his great
spear, and the flash of his arms was as the flame of fire, or as the
rising sun.  And Hector trembled when he saw him, nor dared to abide
his coming.  Fast he fled from the gates, and fast Achilles pursued
him, as a hawk, fastest of all the birds of the air, pursues a dove
upon the mountains.  Past the watch-tower they ran, past the
wind-blown fig tree, along the wagon-road which went about the walls,
and they came to the fair-flowing fountain where from two springs
rises the stream of eddying Scamander.

Past these springs they ran, one fleeing, the other pursuing; brave
was he that fled, braver he that pursued; it was no sheep for
sacrifice or shield of ox-hide for which they ran, but for the life
of Hector, the tamer of horses.  Thrice they ran round the city, and
all the gods looked on.

And Zeus said: "This is a piteous sight that I behold.  My heart is
grieved for Hector--Hector, who has ever worshipped me with
sacrifice; and now the great Achilles is pursuing him round the city
of Priam.  Come, ye gods, let us take counsel together.  Shall we
save him from death, or let him fall beneath the hand of Achilles?"

Then Athene said: "What is this that thou sayest, great sire?--to
rescue a man whom fate has appointed to die?  Do it, if it be thy
will; but we, the other gods, approve it not."

Zeus answered her: "My heart is loath; yet I would do thee pleasure.
Be it as thou wilt."

Then Athene came down in haste from the top of Olympus, and still
Hector fled and Achilles pursued, just as a dog pursues a fawn upon
the hills.  And ever Hector made for the gates, or to get shelter
beneath the towers, so that those that stood upon them might defend
him with their spears; and ever Achilles would get before him, and
drive him towards the plain.  So they ran, one making for the city,
and the other driving him to the plain.

Now Achilles had beckoned to the Greeks that no man should throw his
spear at Hector, lest, perchance, he should be robbed of his glory.
And when the two came in their running for the fourth time to the
springs of Scamander, Zeus held out the great balance of doom, and in
one scale he put the fate of Achilles, and in the other the fate of
Hector; and lo! the scale of Hector sank down to the realms of death,
and Apollo left him.

Then Athene lighted down from the air close to Achilles and said:
"This, great Achilles, is our day of glory, for we shall slay Hector,
mighty warrior though he be.  For it is his doom to die, and not
Apollo's self shall save him.  But stand thou still and take breath,
and I will give this man heart to meet thee in battle."

So Achilles stood leaning upon his spear.  And Athene took the shape
of Deiphobus, and came near to Hector and said:--


De-iph'-o-bus.


"Achilles presses thee hard, my brother, pursuing thee thus round the
city of Priam.  Come, let us make a stand and encounter him."

Then Hector answered him, "Deiphobus, I always loved thee best of all
my brothers; but now I love thee yet more, for thou alone, while all
others remained within, hast ventured forth to stand by my side."

But the false Deiphobus said: "Much did father and mother and all my
comrades beseech me to remain.  But my heart was sore troubled for
thee, and I could not stay.  But let us stand and fight this man, and
see whether he shall carry our spoil to the ships, or we shall slay
him here."

Then the two chiefs came near to each other, and Hector with the
waving plume spake first, and said: "Thrice, great Achilles, hast
thou pursued me round the walls of Troy, and I dared not stand up
against thee; but now I fear thee no more.  Only let us make this
covenant between us: if Zeus give me the victory, I will do no
dishonour to thy body; thy arms and armour will I take, and give back
thy body to the Greeks; and do thou promise to do likewise."

But Achilles scowled at him and said: "Hector, talk not of covenants
to me.  Men and lions make no oaths between each other, neither is
there any agreement between wolves and sheep.  So there shall be no
covenant between me and thee.  One of us two shall fall; and now is
the time for thee to show thyself a warrior, for of a truth Athene
will slay thee by my spear, and thou shalt pay the penalty for all my
comrades whom thou hast slain."

Then he threw the mighty spear, but Hector saw it coming and avoided
it, crouching on the ground, so that the mighty spear flew above his
head and fixed itself in the earth.  But Athene snatched it from the
ground and gave it back to Achilles, Hector not perceiving.

Then Hector spake to Achilles: "Thou hast missed thy aim, great
Achilles.  Now look out for my spear.  Would that it might bury
itself in so thy flesh!  The battle would be easier for the men of
Troy were thou only out of the way."

And as he spake he threw his long-shafted spear.  True aim he took,
for the spear struck the very middle of Achilles' shield.  It struck,
but pierced it not, but bounded far away, for the shield was not of
mortal make.  And Hector stood dismayed, for he had not another
spear, and when he called to Deiphobus that he should give him
another, lo! Deiphobus was gone.  Then Hector knew that his end was
come, and he said to himself: "Now have the gods called me to my
doom.  I thought that Deiphobus was near; but he is within the walls,
and the help which he promised me was but a cheat with which Athene
cheated me.  Zeus and Apollo are with me no more; but if I must die,
let me at least die in such a deed as men of after time may hear of."

So he spake, and drew the mighty sword that hung by his side: then as
an eagle rushes through the clouds to pounce on a lamb, he rushed on
the great Achilles.  But he dealt never a blow; for Achilles charged
to meet him, his shield before his breast, his helmet bent forward as
he ran, with the long plumes streaming behind, and the gleam of his
spear-point was as the gleam of the evening star, which is the
fairest of all the stars in heaven.  One moment he thought where he
should drive it home, for the armour which Hector had won from
Patroclus guarded him well; but one spot there was, where by the
collar-bone the neck joins the shoulder (and nowhere is the stroke of
sword or spear more deadly).  There he drave in the spear, and the
point stood out behind the neck, and Hector fell in the dust.

Then Achilles cried aloud: "Hector, thou thoughtest in the day when
thou didst spoil Patroclus of his arms that thou wouldst be safe from
vengeance.  And lo! thou art fallen before me, and now the dogs and
vultures shall devour thee, but to him all the Greeks shall give due
burial."

But Hector, growing faint, spake to him: "Nay, great Achilles, by thy
life, and by thy knees, and by thy parents dear, I pray thee, let not
the dogs of the Greeks devour me.  Take rather the ransom, gold and
bronze, that my father and mother shall pay thee, and let the sons
and daughters of Troy give me burial rites."

But Achilles scowled at him, and cried: "Dog, seek not to entreat me!
I could mince that flesh of thine and devour it raw, such grief hast
thou wrought me.  Surely the dogs shall devour thee, nor shall any
man hinder.  No ransom, though it were ten times told, should buy
thee back; no, not though Priam should offer thy weight in gold."

Then Hector, who was now at the point to die, spake to him: "I know
thee well, what manner of man thou art, that the heart in thy breast
is iron only.  Only beware lest some vengeance from the gods come
upon thee in the day when Paris and Apollo shall slay thee, for all
thy valour, by the Scæan gates."

So speaking, he died.  But Achilles said, "Die, hound; but my fate I
meet when Zeus and the other gods decree."

Then he drew his spear out of the corpse, and stripped off the arms;
and all the Greeks came about the dead man, marvelling at his stature
and beauty, and no man came but wounded the dead corpse.  And one
would say to another, "Surely this Hector is less dreadful now than
in the day when he would burn our ships with fire."

Then Achilles devised a ruthless thing in his heart.  He pierced the
ankle-bones of Hector, and so bound the body with thongs of ox-hide
to the chariot, letting the head drag behind, the head that once was
so fair, and now was so disfigured in the dust.  So he dragged Hector
to the ships.  And Priam saw him from the walls, and scarce could his
sons keep him back, but that he should go forth and beg the body of
his dear son from him who had slain him.  And Hecuba, his mother,
also bewailed him, but Andromache knew not as yet of what had
befallen.  For she sat in her dwelling, weaving a great purple mantle
broidered with flowers.  And she bade her maidens make ready a bath
for Hector, when he should come back from the battle, nor knew that
he should never need it more.  But the voice of wailing from the town
came to her, and she rose up hastily in great fear, and dropped the
shuttle from her hand, and called to her maidens:--

"Come with me, ye maidens, that I may see what has befallen, for I
heard the voice of Queen Hecuba, and I fear me much that some evil
has come to the children of Priam.  For it may be that Achilles has
run between Hector and the city, and is pursuing him to the plain,
for never will Hector abide with the army, but will fight in the
front, so bold is he."

Then she hasted through the city like as she were mad.  And when she
came to the wall, she stood and looked; and lo! the horses of
Achilles were dragging Hector to the ships.  Then did darkness come
on her, and she fell back fainting.




CHAPTER XXII

THE BURNING OF PATROCLUS

While the Trojans mourned for Hector in the city, the Greeks went
back to the camp.  All the others were scattered, each to his own
ship, but Achilles spake to the Myrmidons, saying, "Loose not your
horses from the yoke, but let us do honour to Patroclus, driving our
chariots round the dead, and making lamentation the while."

Then the Myrmidons did as he had bidden them; thrice round the dead
they drave their chariots, and made lamentation; and Achilles led the
mourning.  Also he laid the body of Hector in the dust beside the
dead.  After that he made a funeral feast for his people.  He himself
was brought by the chiefs, much against his will, to King Agamemnon,
who had made a great feast for the leaders of the Greeks.  But when
the heralds heated water in a caldron, and would have had him wash
off the blood, he refused, saying; "Nay; water shall not come nigh me
till I have laid Patroclus on the fire, and heaped a mound over him.
Now let us eat our meal, though it be in sorrow; to-morrow we will
pay due honour to the dead."

So they ate and drank; and when they had had enough, the others lay
down to sleep, each in his own tent, but Achilles lay groaning
heavily amidst the Myrmidons in an open place by the sea.

The next day they made a great pile of wood, and laid the dead man
thereon.  Nine dogs had the Prince, and Achilles slew two of them on
the pile, and four horses he slew, and also the twelve youths of Troy
whom he had taken at the river.  Then he set fire to the pile,
saying: "Hear, Patroclus; twelve of the sons of Troy doth the fire
devour with thee; but Hector will I give to the dogs."

And when the burning was well-nigh ended, Achilles spake, saying:
"Quench ye the fire that yet remains with wine, and gather the bones
of Patroclus together where they lie apart in the midst of the pile,
and put them in an urn of gold against the day of my death.  And make
over them a tomb not over large; but when I am dead also, then shall
ye that are left make it higher, as is meet."

And when all these things were ended, Achilles, willing to do all
honour to the dead man, would have games, wherein the chiefs should
contend one with the other.  So, having called the people together,
he brought forth out of his ships many things that should be for
prizes,--caldrons, kettles of bronze, and horses and mules, and fair
women-slaves, and iron.

First, he would have a contest of chariots and horses, for which he
set forth prizes: for the first, a woman-slave, skilled in all the
works of the loom, and with her a kettle of bronze; and for the
second, a mare of six years old; and for the third, a kettle of
bronze, fair and new; and for the fourth, two talents of gold; and
for the fifth, a double cup.  Then he stood up in the midst, and
spake: "Ye men of Greece, behold these prizes, which I have set in
the midst for a race of chariots.  Now know ye that if we were doing
honour to another than Patroclus, I myself should carry the first
prize to my tent, for there are not in the camp horses such as mine;
and, indeed, they are not of mortal breed, but Poseidon gave them to
Peleus, my father.  But from this race I stand apart, and they also;
for he that drave them is dead, whom they loved; therefore they stand
grieving sore, and their manes droop to the ground."  Then stood up
five chiefs; first of all, Eumelus, and next to him Diomed, having
horses of Troy, which he took from Æneas; and third, Menelaus,
driving his horse Whitefoot, and a mare, Flash-of-Fire.  Fourth came
Antilochus, son of Nestor, and after him Meriones.


Eu-me'-lus.


After this they drew lots for their places.  And the first lot fell
to Antilochus, and after him came Eumelus, and Menelaus, and
Meriones, and Diomed, in this order.  Then Achilles marked the
course, making old Phœnix the judge.  After this the race began,
and the men lifted their whips and smote their horses, and shouted
also.  And the dust rose up beneath the horses' breasts, and their
manes were blown by the wind, and the chariots were seen now low upon
the earth and now high in the air.  But when they were come near to
the end of the course at the turning-point, it might be seen which
steeds were the better.  For the horses of Eumelus were foremost, and
next to these the horses of King Diomed, very close, so that they
seemed about to step upon the chariot that was before them, and the
back and broad shoulders of Eumelus were hot with their breath.  And
Diomed would now have passed him, or been equal in the race, but
Apollo grudged him the victory,--for the god loved him not,--and
struck the whip out of his hand.  Very wroth was Diomed, and his eyes
were filled with tears, that his horses should thus lack control.
But Athene saw the thing and had pity on him, and gave him back the
whip, and put strength into his horses.  Also she went near to
Eumelus, and brake the yoke of his chariot, so that the pole smote
upon the ground, and the man himself was thrown down, having his
elbows and mouth and nostrils sorely bruised, and a wound on his
forehead over the eyebrows.  Then did Diomed take the first place
with his chariot, and next to him came Menelaus.  But Antilochus
cried to his horses, saying: "Now speed ye as best ye can.  I bid you
not strive with the horses of King Diomed, for Athene giveth them
swiftness and strength; but the horses of Menelaus ye can overtake.
It were a shame to you that Flame-of-Fire, being a mare, should
surpass you."

And the horses feared the fury of the Prince, and leapt forward.  Now
Antilochus had spied a narrow place in the way, where it had been
broken by the floods in the winter; and as Menelaus drove his chariot
thereby, Antilochus, turning a little out of the way, sought to pass
at the same time.  Now there was not space sufficient for two
chariots, and Menelaus feared, and cried: "Why drivest thou so madly,
Antilochus?  Stay awhile, and thou canst pass me if thou wilt, where
the way is broader; but now thou wilt hurt thy chariot and mine."
But Antilochus drave the more furiously, making as though he heard
not.  And for the space of a quoit's throw the chariots were abreast,
but then Menelaus held back, fearing lest they should clash together.
But he cried to Antilochus: "Was there ever man so evil-minded as
thou?  Yet shalt thou not win this prize unless thou shalt forswear
thyself that thou hast dealt fairly."  And to his horses cried:
"Speed ye!  Stand not still; ye shall overtake them, for they will
grow weary before you."

In the meantime the Greeks sat waiting till the chariots should come
back.

Then came in Diomed first of all, and leapt from the chariot; and
next to him Antilochus, having surpassed Menelaus by craft and not by
speed; nor, indeed, was Menelaus far behind, being as near to him as
a chariot is near to the horse which draweth it, so swift was the
mare Flame-of-Fire, for at the first he had been a whole quoit's
throw behind.  But Meriones was vanquished by the flight of a spear,
for his horses were the slowest, and he himself less skilled to
drive.  Last of all came Eumelus, drawing his chariot, and driving
his horses before him.  And Achilles pitied him and said: "The most
skilful cometh last.  Surely he shall have the second prize."

And the Greeks gave consent; but Antilochus cried aloud: "Wilt thou
take away this prize from me because his chariot was broken?  Had he
prayed to the gods, this had not happened.  But if thou pitiest him,
give him somewhat of thine own.  As for this prize, no man taketh it
from me but by arms."

And Achilles laughed and said: "'Tis well said, Antilochus.  I will
give him of mine own, even a breastplate which Asteropæus wore."

Then stood up Menelaus, in great wrath, and said: "What is this that
thou hast done, Antilochus?  For thou hast shamed me and my horses,
putting thine own in front, which are, of a truth, much worse than
they.  Judge, therefore, between us, ye chiefs of the Greeks.  And
thou, Antilochus, stand before thy chariot and thy horses, as the
custom is, holding in one hand thy whip, and laying the other hand on
thine horses, and swear by Poseidon that thou didst not hinder my
chariot by fraud."

To him Antilochus made reply: "Bear with me, Menelaus, for I am
younger than thou, and thou knowest how young men go astray, for
their judgment is hasty and their wit small.  And as for the mare, I
give it thee, and aught else that thou desirest, rather than that I
should be at strife with thee or sin against the gods."

And the soul of Menelaus was glad, as the corn is glad when the dew
falleth upon it; and he said: "This is well said, son of Nestor.  And
now--for thy father and thy brother have borne much for my sake--I
give thee this mare."

And he himself took the kettle of bronze, and the fourth prize
Meriones had; but the double cup Achilles gave to old Nestor, saying:
"Take this to be a memorial of the burial of Patroclus, whom thou
wilt not see any more.  For I know that old age hinders thee, that
thou canst not contend in wrestling or boxing with the rest."

After this Achilles set forth two prizes for boxers: for the
conqueror a mule, and for him that should be vanquished a cup with
two mouths.  Then stood up Epeius and spake: "Who desireth to take
this cup? for the mule no man but I shall have.  In battle I am
weak--for what man can do all things?--but whosoever shall stand
against me to-day, verily, I will tear his flesh and break his bones,
so that his friends had best be at hand to carry him away."


E-pei'-us.


Then there rose up against him Euryalus.  King Diomed stood by him,
wishing much that he might prevail, and brought him his girdle that
he might gird himself, and gave him the great gloves of bull's hide.
Then the two stood together in the midst.  Many blows did they deal
to each other, so that the noise was dreadful to hear, and the sweat
ran down from them.  But after awhile Epeius sprang forward and smote
Euryalus on the jaw, even through his guard, and Euryalus could not
stand against him; but even as a fish is dashed by the north wind
against the shore, so was he dashed to the earth.  But Epeius raised
him up, and his companions led him away, sorely wounded and amazed.


Eu-ry'-a-lus.


After this Achilles would have a match of wrestling, saying that the
conqueror should have a great kettle of bronze, of twelve oxen's
worth, and the vanquished a woman-slave, skilful at the loom, worth
four oxen.  Then stood up Ajax the Greater and Ulysses, and took hold
of one another with their hands, and strove together for the mastery.
But after a while, when neither could prevail, and the people were
weary with looking, Ajax spake, saying: "Come, Ulysses; thou shalt
lift me from the ground if thou canst, and I thee.  So shall we
finish this matter."  Then Ajax laid hold of Ulysses to lift him; and
this he had done, but Ulysses used craft, as was his wont, and put
forth his leg and smote Ajax on the sinew behind the knee, so that he
fell, and Ulysses also above him.  Then Ulysses would have lifted
Ajax from the ground; a little space he moved him, but lifted him
not, and his knee yielded beneath him, and they fell to the ground,
both of them.  But when they would have striven the third time,
Achilles hindered them, saying: "Hold! it is enough.  Ye are
conquerors both, and your prizes shall be equal."

Next to this was a trial of racers on foot, in which three contended,
Ajax the Less, and Ulysses, and Antilochus.  In a short space Ajax
the Less was foremost, with Ulysses close upon him, close as is the
shuttle to the breast of a woman who stands at the loom and weaves.
Hard behind him he ran, treading in his steps before the dust could
rise from them.  And when they were now drawing to the end of the
course Ulysses prayed to Athene that she should help him, and Athene
heard him, and made his knees and feet right nimble, and even at the
very end she caused that Ajax slipped in the filth where certain oxen
had been slain, so that his mouth and nostrils were filled with it.
So Ulysses gained the mixing-bowl; but Ajax stood and spat the filth
from his mouth, and laid his hand on the head of the ox, and cried,
"Surely the goddess caused my feet to slip, for she ever standeth by
Ulysses, and helpeth him as a mother helpeth a child."

So he spake, and all men laughed to hear him; and last of all came
Antilochus, taking the third prize.  And he said: "Ye know well, my
friends, that the immortal gods ever help the aged.  As for Ajax, he
is but a little older than I, but Ulysses is of another generation.
Yet is his verily a green old age; hardly may any of the Greeks
strive with him, but only Achilles himself."

So the Games of Patroclus were ended; and the people were scattered
to the ships, and sat down to eat and drink; and afterwards they
slept.  But Achilles slept not, for he remembered his dear Patroclus,
and all that the two had done and endured together, journeying over
sea and land, and standing against the enemy in the day of battle.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE RANSOMING OF HECTOR

When the burial of Patroclus was ended, the gods held council about
Hector, for Achilles did despite to the body of Hector, dragging it
about the tomb of his friend, but the gods had pity on the dead man,
because in his life he had ever honoured them.

Then did Zeus send for Thetis, and when she was come to Olympus, he
said: "Get thee to the camp, and bid thy son give up Hector for
ransom, for I am wroth with him because he doth despite to the dead."

So Thetis went to Achilles, and found him weeping softly for his dead
friend, for the strength of his sorrow was now spent, and she said to
him: "It is the will of the gods that thou give up the body of
Hector, and take in exchange the ransom of gold and precious things
which his father will give thee for him."

And her son answered, "Be it so, if the gods will have it."

Then Zeus sent Iris, who was his messenger, to King Priam, where he
sat with his face wrapped in his mantle, and his sons weeping about
him, and his daughters wailing through the chambers of his palace.

Then Iris spake: "Be of good cheer, Priam, Zeus has sent me to thee.
Go, taking with thee such gifts as may best please the heart of
Achilles, and bring back the body of thy dear son Hector.  Go without
fear of death or harm, and go alone.  Only let an aged herald be with
thee, to help thee when thou bringest back the body of the dead."

Then Priam rose with joy, and bade his sons bring forth his chariot;
but first he went to his chamber, and called to Hecuba, his wife, and
told her of his purpose, nor heeded when she sought to turn him from
it, but said: "Seek not to hold me back, nor be a bird of evil omen
in my house.  If any prophet or seer had bidden me do this thing, I
should have held it a deceit; but now have I heard the very voice of
the messenger of Zeus.  Wherefore, I shall go.  And if I die, what
care I?  Let Achilles slay me, if only I embrace once more the body
of my son."

Then he bade put into a wagon shawls and mantles that had never been
washed, and rugs, and cloaks, and tunics, twelve of each, and ten
talents of gold, and two bright three-footed caldrons, and four
basins, and a cup of passing beauty which the Thracians had given
him.  The old man spared nothing that he had, if only he might buy
back his son.  None of the Trojans would he suffer to come near him.
"Begone," he cried, "ye cowards!  Have ye nothing to wail for at
home, that ye come to wail with me?  Surely, an easy prey will ye be
to the Greeks, now that Hector is dead."

Then the old man mounted his chariot in haste, and drove forth from
the palace.  Before him the mules drew the four-wheeled wagon, and
these the herald Idæus guided.  But his chariot the old King drove
himself.  And all his kinsfolk went with him, weeping as for one who
was going to his death.  But when they came down from the city to the
plain, Priam and the herald went towards the ships of the Greeks, but
all the others returned to Troy.

But Zeus saw him depart, and said to Hermes: "Hermes, go guide King
Priam to the ships of the Greeks, so that no man see him before he
comes to the tents of Achilles."

Then Hermes fastened on his feet the fair sandals of gold with which
he flies, fast as the wind, over sea and land, and in his hand he
took the rod with which he opens and closes, as he wills, the eyes of
men.  And he flew down and lighted on the plain of Troy, taking on
him the likeness of a fair youth.

But when they had driven past the great Tomb of Ilus, they stopped
the horses and the mules, to let them drink of the river.  And
darkness came over the land; and then the herald spied Hermes, and
said:--


Her'-mes.


"Consider, my lord, what we shall do.  I see a man, and I am sore
afraid lest he slay us.  Shall we flee on the chariot, or shall we go
near and entreat him, that he may have pity upon us?"

Then the old man was sore troubled, and his hair stood up with fear.
But Hermes came near and took him by the hand and said:--

"Whither goest thou, old man, with thy horses and mules through the
darkness?  Hast thou no fear of these fierce Greeks, who are close at
hand?  If any one should see thee with all this wealth, what then?
And thou art not young, nor is thy attendant young, that ye should
defend yourselves against an enemy.  But I will not harm thee, nor
suffer any other, for thou art like my own dear father."

"It is well, my son," said the old man.  "Surely one of the blessed
gods is with me, in causing me to meet such an one as thou, so fair
and so wise.  Happy the parents of such a son!"

And Hermes said: "Come, tell me true, old man.  Are you sending away
all these treasures that they may be kept safe for you far away? or
are all the men of Troy leaving the city, seeing now that Hector, who
was their bravest warrior, is dead?"

Then Priam answered, "Who art thou, my son, and what thy race, that
thou speakest so truly about my hapless son?"

"Often," said Hermes, "have I seen Hector in the battle, both at
other times, and when he drove the Greeks before him at the ships.
We, indeed, stood and watched and marvelled at him, for Achilles
would not suffer us to fight, being wroth with King Agamemnon.  Now I
am a follower of Achilles, coming from Greece in the same ship with
him."

Then said Priam, "If thou art an attendant of Achilles, tell me true,
is my son yet by the ships, or have the dogs devoured him?"

And Hermes answered: "Nor dogs nor vultures have devoured him.  Still
he lies by the ships of Achilles; and though this is the twelfth day
since he was slain, no decay has touched him.  Nay, though Achilles
drags him round the tomb of his dear Patroclus, yet even so does no
unseemliness come to him.  All fresh he lies, and the blood is washed
from him, and all his wounds are closed--and many spear-points
pierced him.  The blessed gods love him well, dead man though he be."

This King Priam was well pleased to hear.  "It is well," he said,
"for a man to honour the gods; for, indeed, as my son never forgot
the dwellers on Olympus, so have they not forgotten him, even in
death.  But do thou take this fair cup, and do kindness to him, and
lead me to the tent of Achilles."

"Nay," answered Hermes; "thou speakest this in vain.  No gift would I
take from thy hand unknown to Achilles; for I honour him much, and
fear to rob him, lest some evil happen to me afterwards.  But thee I
will guide to Argos itself, if thou wilt, whether by land or sea, and
no one shall blame my guiding."

Then he leapt into the chariot of the King and caught the reins in
his hand, and gave the horses and the mules a strength that was not
their own.  And when they came to the ditch and the trench that
guarded the ships, lo! the guards were busy with their meal; but
Hermes made sleep descend upon them, and opened the gates, and
brought in Priam with his treasures.  And when they came to the tent
of Achilles, Hermes lighted down from the chariot and said:--

"Lo!  I am Hermes, whom my father Zeus hath sent to be thy guide.
And now I shall depart, for I would not that Achilles should see me.
But go thou in, and clasp his knees, and beseech him by his father,
and his mother, and his child.  So shalt thou move his heart with
pity."

So Hermes departed to Olympus, and King Priam leapt down from the
chariot, leaving the herald to care for the horses and the mules, and
went to the tent.  There he found Achilles sitting; his comrades sat
apart, but two waited on him, for he had but newly ended his meal,
and the table was yet at his hand.  But no man saw King Priam till he
was close to Achilles, and caught hit knees and kissed his hands, the
dreadful, murderous hands that had slain so many of his sons, and
Achilles wondered to see King Priam, and his comrades wondered,
looking one at another.  Then King Priam spake:--

"Think of thy father, godlike Achilles, and pity me.  He is old, as I
am, and, it may be, his neighbours trouble him, seeing that he has no
defender; yet so long as he knows that thou art alive, it is well
with him, for every day he hopes to see his dear son returned from
Troy.  But as for me, I am altogether wretched.  Many a valiant son I
had,--nineteen born to me of one mother,--and most of them are dead,
and he that was the best of all, who kept our city safe, he has been
slain by thee.  He it is whom I have come to ransom.  Have pity on
him and on me, thinking of thy father.  Never, surely, was lot so sad
as this, to kiss the hands that slew a son."

And the words so stirred the heart if Achilles that he wept, thinking
now of Patroclus, and now of his old father at home; and Priam wept,
thinking of his dead Hector.  But at last Achilles stood up from his
seat and raised King Priam, having pity on his white hair and his
white beard, and spake:--

"How didst thou dare to come to the ships of the Greeks, to the man
who slew thy sons?  Surely, thou must have a heart of iron.  But sit
thou down: let our sorrows rest in our hearts, for there is no profit
in lamentation.  It is the will of the gods that men should suffer
woe, but they are themselves free from care."

But Priam answered: "Make me not to sit, great Achilles, while Hector
lies unhonoured.  Let me ransom him, and look upon him with my eyes,
and do thou take the gifts.  And the gods grant thee to return safe
to thy fatherland."

Then Achilles hastened from his tent, and two comrades with him.
First they loosed the horses from the chariot and the mules from the
wagon; then they brought in the herald Idæus, and took the gifts.
Only they left of them two cloaks and a tunic, wherein they might
wrap the dead.  And Achilles bade the women wash and anoint the body,
but apart from the tent, lest, perchance, Priam should see his son
and cry aloud.  But when it was washed and anointed, Achilles himself
lifted it in his arms and put it on the litter, and his comrades
lifted the litter on the wagon.

And when all was finished, Achilles groaned and cried to his dead
friend, saying:--

"Be not wroth, Patroclus, if thou shouldst hear in the unknown land
that I have ransomed Hector to his father: a noble ransom hath he
paid me, and of this, too, thou shalt have thy share, as is meet."

Then he went back to his tent, and set himself down, over against
Priam, and spake: "Thy son is ransomed, old man, and to-morrow shalt
thou see him and take him back to Troy.  But now let us eat.
To-morrow shalt thou weep for Hector."

So they ate and drank.  And when the meal was ended, Achilles sat and
marvelled at King Priam's noble look, and King Priam marvelled at
Achilles, so strong he was and fair.

Then Priam said: "Let me sleep, great Achilles.  I have not slept
since my son fell by thy hand.  Now I have eaten and drunk, and my
eyes are heavy."

So the comrades of Achilles made him a bed outside, where no one
might see him, should it chance that any of the chiefs should come to
the tent of Achilles to take counsel, and should espy him, and tell
it to King Agamemnon.

But before he slept King Priam said: "If thou art minded to let me
bury Hector, let there be a truce between my people and the Greeks.
For nine days let us mourn for Hector, and on the tenth will we bury
him and feast the people, and on the eleventh raise a great tomb
above him, and on the twelfth we will fight again, if fight we must."

And Achilles answered: "Be it so: I will stay the war for so long."

But while Priam slept there came to him Hermes, the messenger of
Zeus, and said: "Sleepest thou, Priam, among thy foes?  Achilles has
taken ransom for thy Hector; but thy sons that are left would pay
thrice as much for thee should Agamemnon hear that thou wert among
the ships."

The old man heard and trembled, and roused the herald, and the two
yoked the horses and the mules.  So they passed through the army, and
no man knew.  And when they came to the river, Hermes departed to
Olympus, and the morning shone over all the earth.  Wailing and
weeping, they carried the body to the city.

And straightway there was not man or woman left in the city.  They
met the wagon when it was close to the gates: his wife led the way,
and his mother and all the multitude followed.  And in truth they
would have kept it thus till evening, weeping and wailing, but King
Priam spake:--

"Let us pass; ye shall have enough of wailing when we have taken him
to his home."

So they took him to his home and laid him on his bed.  And the
minstrels lamented, and the women wailed.

Then first of all came Andromache, his wife, and cried:--

"O my husband, thou hast perished in thy youth, and I am left in
widowhood, and our child, thy child and mine, is but an infant!  I
fear me he will not grow to manhood.  Ere that day this city will
fall, for thou art gone who wast its defender."

Next spake Hecuba, his mother: "Dear wast thou, my son, in life to
the immortal gods, and dear in death.  Achilles dragged thee about
the tomb of his dear Patroclus, but could not bring him back, and now
thou liest fresh and fair as one whom the God of the silver bow has
slain with sudden stroke."

And last of all came Helen, and cried: "Many a year has passed since
I came to Troy--would that I had died before!  And never have I heard
from thy lips one bitter word, and if others spake harshly to me,
thou wouldst check them with thy gracious words.  Therefore I weep
for thee; no one is left to be my friend in all the broad streets of
Troy.  All shun and hate me now."

And all the people wailed reply.

Then Priam spake: "Go, my people, gather wood for the burial, and
fear not any ambush of the Greeks, for Achilles promised that he
would stay the war until the twelfth day should come."

So for nine days the people gathered much wood, and on the tenth they
laid Hector upon the pile, and lit fire beneath it.  And when it was
burnt they quenched the embers with wine.  Then his brethren and
comrades gathered together the white bones, and laid them in a chest
of gold; and this they covered with purple robes and put it in a
great coffin, and laid upon it stones many and great.  And over all
they raised a mighty mound; and all the while the watchers watched,
lest the Greeks should arise and slay them.  Last of all was a great
feast held in the palace of King Priam.

So they buried Hector.

After these things Achilles himself perished, for he strove to break
through the Scæan gate, and there Paris wounded him to the death with
an arrow, but it was Apollo that guided the archer's hand.

And when Troy still could not be taken, the Greeks pretended to
depart, burning their camp and sailing away in their ships.  But they
left behind them a great horse of wood in which the bravest of the
chiefs hid themselves.  This the men of Troy drew into their city;
and at night, when their thoughts were given to feasting, for they
thought that the war was ended, the chiefs came out of the horse and
threw open the gate, so that the Greeks entered and took the city.




PRONUNCIATION OF PROPER NAMES

Pronounce _æ_ as in _Cæsar_; _ei_ as _i_ in _island_; [_oe_] as _æ_;
_y_, when accented, as _i_ in _island_; when unaccented, as _i_ in
_till_.

Pronounce _ch_ as _k_.  _C_ and _g_ are soft (as _s_ and _j_) before
_ei_, _i_, _y_, _æ_, [_oe_], _eu_; otherwise, hard, as _k_ and _g_
(in _gas_).


  A-chil'-les.
  Æ-ne'-as.
  Ag-a-mem'-non.
  A-ge'-nor.
  A'-jax.
  An-chi'-ses.
  An-dræ'-mon.
  An-drom'-a-che.
  An-te'-nor.
  An-til'-o-chus.
  Aph-ro-di'-te.
  A-pol'-lo.
  A'-res.
  Ar'-te-mis.
  A'-si-us.
  As-ter-o-pæ'-us.
  As-ty'-a-nax.
  A-the'-ne.
  A'-treus.
  Au-tom'-e-don.
  Ax'-i-us.

  Bel-ler'-o-phon.
  Bri-a'-re-us.
  Bri-se'-is.

  Cal'-chas.
  Ceb-ri'-o-nes.
  Chry'-se.
  Chry-se'-is.
  Chry'-ses.
  Co'-on.

  De-iph'-o-bus.
  Di'-o-med.
  Di-o'-ne.
  Do'-lon.

  E-pei'-us.
  Eu-me'-lus.
  Eu-phor'-bus.
  Eu-ry'-a-lus.
  Eu-ryb'-a-tes.
  Eu-ryp'-a-lus.

  Glau'-cus.

  Ha'-des.
  He'-be.
  Hec'-u-ba.
  Hel'-e-nus.
  Hel'-les-pont.
  He-phæs'-tus.
  He'-ra.
  Her'-mes.
  Her-mi'-o-ne.
  Hip-pol'-o-chus,

  I-dæ'-us.
  I-do'-me-neus.
  I'-lus.
  I-phid'-a-mas.
  I'-ris.

  La-er'-tes.
  La-o'-di-ce.
  La-o'-do-cus.
  Le'-da.
  Lyc'-i-a.
  Lyr-nes'-sus.

  Ma-cha'-on.
  Men-e-la'-us.
  Men-œ'-ti-us.
  Me-ri'-o-nes.
  My-ce'-næ.
  Myr'-mi-dons.

  Oe'-neus.
  O-lym'-pus.
  O-ri'-on.

  Pæ'-on
  Pan'-da-rus.
  Pa-tro'-clus
  Ped'-a-sus.
  Pe'-leus.
  Phœ'-nix.
  Phthi'-a.
  Po-lyd'-a-mas.
  Pol-y-do'-rus.
  Po-sei'-don.

  Rhe'-sus.

  Sa-mo-thrace'.
  Sar-pe'-don.
  Scæ'-an.
  Sca-man'-der.
  Sca-man'-dri-us.
  Si'-don.
  Si-do'-ni-an.
  Si'-mo-is.
  Sthen'-e-lus.

  Tal-thyb'-i-us.
  Tar'-tar-us.
  Tel'-a-mon.
  Teu'-cer.
  Ther-si'-tes.
  The'-tis.
  Tho'-as.
  Thra'-ci-ans.
  Ty'-deus.

  Xan'-thus.


As many of the Greek gods are better known under the names given to
them by the Romans, the following list is given:--

  _Greek_ -- _Latin_

  Zeus. -- Jupiter.
  Hera. -- Juno.
  (Pallas) Athene. -- Minerva.
  Aphrodite. -- Venus.
  Poseidon. -- Neptune.
  Ares. -- Mars.
  Hephæstus. -- Vulcan.



Printed In the United States of America.











*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF THE ILIAD ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


